10. 
INDIAN VEGETARIANS-IV 
After having known who are vegetarians in India, and what 
they generally eat, the reader will be able to judge from the 
following facts how hollow and baseless are the arguments advanc-
ed by some people regarding the weak constitutions of the vege-
tarian Hindus. 
One thing often said about the Indian vegetarians is that they 
are physically very feeble, and that, therefore, vegetarianism is 
not compatible with bodily strength. 
Now, if it can be proved that generally in India the vege-
tarians are as strong as, if not stronger than, the Indian meat-
eaters, and for that matter even Englishmen, and moreover, that 
where weakness exists it can be ascribed to many other rea-
sons than that of non-flesh diet, the whole structure on which the 
above argument is based falls to the ground. 
It must at the outset be admitted that the Hindus as a rule 
are notoriously weak; but an unbiased person—a meat-eater—
who knows India and her people even superficially will tell you 
that there are many other causes incessantly at work to account 
for the proverbial weakness. One of the most important reasons, 
if not the most important one, is the wretched custom of infant 
marriages and its attendant evils. Generally, children when they 
reach the great age of nine are burdened with the fetters of 
married life. In many cases they are married at a still younger age 
1 William Sproston Caine (1842-1903); four times member of British 
Parliament; served on the Indian Parliamentary sub-committee of the British 
Committee of the Congress; supported self-government for India. 
Was keenly 
interested in South African Indians' cause. 
24 
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI 
and in some cases they are betrothed while yet unborn. Thus one 
woman would promise to marry her child, if male, to another's, 
if female, and vice versa. Of course in the two latter cases consum-
mation does not take place before they are ten or eleven years old. 
Cases are recorded in which a wife of twelve had a child by a hus-
band of sixteen or seventeen. Will not these marriages tell upon 
the strongest constitutions? 
Now fancy how weak the progeny of such marriages must be. 
Then look at the cares such a couple have to undergo. Suppose a 
boy of eleven is married to a girl of about the same age. Thus at 
a time when the boy should be, and is, ignorant of what it is to 
be a husband, he has a wife forced on him. He is, of course, at-
tending his school. In addition to the drudgery at school he has 
his child-wife to look after. He has not actually to maintain her, 
for in India a son when married does not necessarily separate from 
his parents unless he be at sixes and sevens1 with them; but he 
has to do everything short of that. Then about six years after 
marriage he has a son, probably he has not yet finished his studies, 
and he has to think of earning money not only to maintain him-
self but his wife and child, for he cannot expect to pass his whole 
life with his father, and even granting that he may, he should cer-
tainly be expected to contribute something towards his wife's 
and his child's maintenance. Will not the mere knowledge of his 
duty prey upon his mind and thus undermine his health? Can 
anyone dare to say that this will not shatter a most robust consti-
tution? 
But one may well argue that if that boy, in the above 
example, had eaten flesh-meat he would have kept stronger than 
he did. A reply to such an argument is to be found from those 
Kshatriya princes who in spite of their meat diet are very weak 
owing to debauchery. 
Then the shepherds in India afford a good example of how 
strong an Indian vegetarian can be where other opposite agencies 
are not at work. An Indian shepherd is a finely built man of 
Herculean constitution. He, with his thick, strong cudgel, would be 
a match for any ordinary European with his sword. Cases are re-
corded of shepherds having killed or driven away tigers and lions 
with their cudgels. "But," said a friend one day, "this is an exam-
ple of men living in the rude and natural state. 
In the present 
highly artificial state of society you require something more than 
mere cabbage and peas. Your shepherd lacks intelligence, he reads 
no books, etc., etc." 
The one and only answer to this was, 
1 Gandhiji perhaps means 'at variance'. 
INDIAN VEGETARIANS‒IV 
25 
and is, that the vegetarian shepherd would be equal to, if not 
more than a match for, a meat-eating shepherd. Thus there is a 
comparison between a vegetarian of one class and a meat-eater of 
the same class. It is a comparison between strength and strength, 
and not between strength and strength plus intelligence, for my 
attempt for the moment is simply to disprove that Indian vege-
tarians are physically weak on account of their vegetarianism. 
Eat what food you will, it is impossible, it seems, to make 
physical and mental strength go together except, perhaps, in rare 
cases. The law of compensation will require that what is gained in 
mental power must be lost in bodily power. A Samson cannot be 
a Gladstone. And granting the argument that a substitute is re-
quired for vegetables in the present state of society, is it conclu-
sively proved that flesh or meat is that substitute? 
Then take the case of the Kshatriyas, the so-called warlike 
race in India. They are, of course, meat-eaters and how few of 
them there are who have wielded a sword! 
Far be it from me to 
say that they as a race are very weak. So long as Pruthuraj1 and 
Bhim2 and all of their type—not to go to the olden times—are 
remembered, he will be a fool who would have it believed that 
they are a weak race. But now it is a sad fact that they have 
degenerated. The truly warlike people, among others, are the 
people of the North-Western provinces, known as Bhayas3. They 
subsist on wheat, pulse, and greens. They are the guardians of 
peace, they are largely employed in the native armies. 
From the above facts it is easy to see that vegetarianism is 
not only not injurious, but on the contrary is conducive to bodily 
strength and that attributing the Hindu weakness 
to 
vege-
tarianism is simply based on a fallacy. 
The Vegetarian, 28-2-1891 
1 Prithviraj Chauhan, 
11th-century king claiming descent from 
the 
Sun; famed for his physical prowess 
2 Second of the Pandava Princes, in the Mahabharata, 
reputed for his 
great stature and strength. 
3 The reference is to the Bhayyas (literally, brothers), a name originally given 
to the peasantry of Uttar Pradesh 
