11. 
INDIAN VEGETARIANS—V 
We saw in the last article that the bodily weakness of the 
Hindu vegetarians was attributable to other causes than their 
diet, and also that the shepherds who were vegetarians were as 
strong as meat-eaters. 
This shepherd being a very good speci-
men of a vegetarian, we may with profit examine his way of 
living; but before proceeding further, the reader may be told 
that what follows does not apply to all the Indian shepherds. 
It applies to the shepherds of a certain part of India. Just as the 
habits of the people in Scotland would be different from those of 
the people in England, so also would the habits of the people 
living in one part of India be different from those of the people 
living in another part. 
The Indian shepherd then gets up generally at five o'clock 
in the morning. The first thing he does, if he is a pious shepherd, 
is to offer some prayers to his God. Then he does his toilet which 
consists in washing his mouth and face. I may be allowed here to 
digress for a while to acquaint the reader with the brush an Indian 
uses for his teeth. The brush is nothing more than a branch of 
a thorny tree called babul; one branch is cut up into pieces 
about a foot long. Of course, all the thorns are removed. The 
Indian crushes one end of the stick between his teeth till it is soft 
enough to brush his teeth. Thus he makes for himself every day 
a new and home-made brush. When he has well brushed his teeth 
and made them pearl white he splits the stick into two, and 
after bending one part into a curve scrapes his tongue. 
This 
process of brushing probably accounts for the strong and beauti-
ful teeth of the average Indian. It is perhaps superfluous to add 
that he uses no tooth powder. Old persons when their teeth are 
not strong enough to crush the stick use a small hammer. 
The 
whole process does not take more than twenty or twenty-five 
minutes. 
To return to the shepherd, he then takes his breakfast con-
sisting of a thick cake made of millet—an Anglo-Indian name for 
bajari, a kind of corn much used in India instead of, or in addi-
tion to, wheat—clarified butter and molasses. At about eight or 
nine o'clock in the morning he goes to pasture the cattle placed 
under his superintendence. The place of pasture is generally two or 
three miles from his town. 
It is a hilly tract of land studded 
with a green carpet of luxuriant foliage. Thus he has the unique 
INDIAN VEGETARIANS-VI 
27 
advantage of enjoying the freshest air with natural 
scenery 
thrown in. While the cattle are roaming about, he whiles away 
his time in singing or talking to his companion who may be his 
wife, brother or some other relation. 
At about twelve o'clock 
he takes his lunch, which he always carries with him. It consists 
of the ever-present cakes, clarified butter, one vegetable, or some 
pulse, or instead, or in addition, some pickle and fresh milk 
directly taken from the cow. Then at about two or three o'clock 
he not infrequently takes a nap for about half an hour under 
some shady tree. This short sleep gives him relief from the heat of 
the scorching sun. At six he returns home, at seven he has sup-
per, for which he takes some hot cakes, pulse or vegetables, winds 
up with rice and milk, or rice and whey. 
After doing some 
household business, which often means a pleasant chat with the 
family members, he goes to bed at ten o'clock. He sleeps either 
in the open air, or in a hut which is sometimes overcrowded. He 
resorts to the hut in winter or in the rainy season. 
It may be 
worthy of remark that these huts, even though miserable in ap-
pearance and often without any windows, are not air tight. Being 
constructed in a rude state, their doors are made, not as a pro-
tection against draughts of wind, but against burglars. 
It cannot, 
however, be denied that there is much room for improvement 
in the huts. 
Such, then, is the living of a well-to-do shepherd. His, in many 
respects, is an ideal mode of life. 
He is perforce regular in his 
habits, is out of doors during the greater part of his time, while 
out he breathes the purest air, has his due amount of exercise, 
has good and nourishing food and last but not least, is free from 
many cares which are frequently productive of weak constitutions. 
The Vegetarian, 7-3-1891 
