12. INDIAN VEGETARIANS‒ VI 
The only flaw that can be found in his mode of living is the 
paucity of baths. In a hot climate baths are very useful. While a 
Brahmin would have his bath twice a day, and a Vaisya once a 
day, a shepherd would have only one bath a week. 
I shall here 
again digress to explain the manner in which the Indian takes his 
baths. 
Generally, he has his baths in the river flowing near his 
town, but if he is too idle to go to the river, or is afraid of being 
drowned, or if there is no river near his town, he has his baths 
at home. There is no bath into which he can plunge. He takes 
28 
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI 
water from a large vessel, placed near him, with a goblet and 
pours it over his body, because he believes that the moment you 
plunge into stagnant water you render it impure and, therefore, 
unfit for further use. 
For the same reason he would not even 
wash his hands in a basin, but have someone to pour it over 
his hands or do it himself by holding the goblet between his arms. 
But to return, the paucity of the baths does not, it seems, 
materially affect his health; while it is obvious that if the Brah-
min were to go without his baths even for a day, he would feel 
very uncomfortable, and if he were to continue not taking them 
a little longer, he would very soon become ill. 
This is, I suppose, an instance of many things which, otherwise 
inexplicable, can be accounted for by habit. Thus while a scaven-
ger, in pursuing his employment keeps good health, any ordi-
nary person trying to do the same will be face to face with 
death. Death would soon be knocking at the door of a delicately 
nurtured lord trying to imitate an East End labourer. 
I cannot help here giving a fable or anecdote which is exactly 
to the point. A king fell in love with a female toothbrush seller, 
who was a very Venus in beauty. As might naturally be expected 
she was ordered to be placed in the king's palace. She was, in fact, 
placed in the lap of luxury. 
She had the best food, 
the best 
clothes, in short, everything of the best. And lo! in proportion to 
the luxury, her health began to fail. Scores of physicians were in 
attendance, but all the drugs most regularly administered proved 
of no avail. Meanwhile a shrewd physician found out the real cause 
of all the illness. He said that she was possessed by evil spirits. 
Therefore, in order to satisfy them, he ordered some pieces of old 
cakes to be set, together with fruit in each of her many rooms. 
They were to disappear in as many days as there were rooms, 
and with them, he said, the illness would disappear. And it was 
so. Of course the cakes were consumed by the poor queen. 
Now this shows the mastery that habit gets over men. So I 
think the paucity of baths does not greatly harm the shepherd. 
The result of this mode of living was partially noticed in the 
last article, viz., the vegetarian shepherd is physically strong. He 
is also long-lived. I know a shepherdess who was more than one 
hundred years old in 1888. 
When I last saw her her eyesight 
was very good. Her memory was fresh. She could recollect things 
that she had seen in her childhood. She could walk with a stick 
to support her. I hope she is still living. 
Besides, the shepherd's figure is symmetrical. It is very rare 
to see any deformity in him. Without being fierce like a tiger, 
SOME INDIAN FESTIVALS‒I 
29 
he is yet strong and brave and as docile as a lamb. Without being 
awe-inspiring, his stature is commanding. Altogether, the Indian 
shepherd is a very fine specimen of a vegetarian, and will com-
pare very favourably with any meat-eater so far as bodily strength 
goes. 
The Vegetarian, 14-3-1891 
