13. 
SOME INDIAN FESTIVALS‒I 
At this Easter time I should have liked to write something 
on the holidays which correspond to the Easter in point of time; 
but these holidays with their painful associations not being the 
greatest Hindu festival may very properly give way to the Divali 
holidays which are far superior in importance and grandeur to 
the former. 
Divali, which may be termed the Hindu Christmas, occurs 
at the end of the Hindu year, i.e., during the month of Novem-
ber. It is both a social and religious holiday. It spreads over 
nearly a month. The first day of the month of Ashwin (the twelfth 
month of the Hindu year) heralds the approach of the grand festi-
val when the children let off their first fire-works. The first nine 
days are called Nava Ratri (nine nights). These days are chiefly 
marked by garbis. Some twenty or thirty, and even more people 
form themselves into a large circle, in the centre is placed a huge 
lamp-post tastefully constructed and illuminated all round, in the 
centre also sits a man with his tabors reciting some popular ver-
ses. The people forming the circle repeat the verses, keeping time 
to them with claps of hands. 
While repeating the verses, they 
move round the lamp-post, at the same time stooping down in a 
half-bending posture. It is very often a great treat to hear these 
garbis. 
It may be remarked that girls—much less women—never 
take part in them. 
Of course they may have their own garbis 
where men would be excluded. In some families the custom of 
half-fasting prevails. It is sufficient if one member only of the 
family fasts. The fasting man has only one meal a day, and that, 
too, in the evening. Moreover, he is not allowed any corn or 
pulse, but is restricted to fruit, milk and root vegetables such as 
potatoes, etc. 
The tenth day of the month is called Dashara, when friends 
meet and feast one another. It is also customary to make pre-
sents of sweets to one's friends, and especially patrons or supe-
30 
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI 
riors. Except on the Dashara holiday all the amusements are 
carried on at night, while the ordinary daily pursuits are attended 
to in the daytime. After Dashara 
everything is comparatively 
quiet for about a fortnight, except that the ladies are making 
preparations for the approaching grand day, by cooking and 
baking sweets, cakes, etc., for, in India, women of the highest class 
would not mind cooking. In fact, it is an accomplishment which 
every lady is supposed to possess. 
Thus, spending the evenings in feasting and singing, we reach 
the thirteenth day of the dark half of the month Ashwin. 
(In 
India every month is divided into two parts, the dark half and 
the bright half, the full-moon day and the new-moon day being 
starting points; thus, the day following the full-moon day is the 
first day of the dark half of a month, and so on.) The thirteenth 
day and the three following days are wholly devoted to amuse-
ments and enjoyment. The thirteenth day is called Dhanterash, i.e., 
the thirteenth day set apart for the worship of "Lakshmi", the god-
dess of wealth. Rich people collect different kinds of jewels, pre-
cious stones, coins, etc., and put them carefully into a box. 
These they never use for any other purpose than that of worship. 
Each year an addition is made to this collection. The worship, 
i.e., the external worship—for who, save a select few, is there who 
does not at heart covet, or in other words, worship money?—
consists in washing the money with water and milk, and then deco-
rating it with flowers and kumkum, i.e., red ochre. 
The fourteenth day is called Kali-Chaudash; but this day people 
get up before the break of day, and even the laziest person is re-
quired to take a good bath; the mother even compels her little 
children to take a bath, though it is the winter season. 
On the 
night of Kali-Chaudash, cemeteries are supposed to be visited by 
a procession of ghosts. Persons affecting to believe in ghosts would 
go to these places to see their ghost friends. Timid ones would 
not stir out of their houses lest they should see a ghost. 
The Vegetarian, 28-3-1891 
