14. SOME INDIAN FESTIVALS-II 
But lo! now is the morning of the fifteenth day, Divali pro-
per. The greatest fireworks are let off on the Divali day. No one is 
willing to part with his money on this day. He will neither bor-
row nor lend. All the purchases are supposed to have been finished 
the previous day. 
You are standing near the corner of a public road. Mark the 
shepherd trotting onward in his milk-white suit, worn for the first 
time, with his long beard turned up beside his face and fastened 
under his turban, singing some broken verses. 
A herd of cows, 
with their horns painted red and green and mounted with silver, 
follows him. Soon after you see a crowd of little maids, with small 
earthen vessels resting on cushions placed on their heads. You 
wonder what those vessels contain. Your doubt is soon solved 
by that careless maid spilling some milk from her vessel. Then 
observe that big man with white whiskers and a big white tur-
ban, with a long reed pen thrust into his turban. He has a long 
scarf wound round his waist with a silver inkstand adjusted in the 
scarf. He, you must know, is a great banker. Thus you see different 
sorts of persons leisurely going along, full of joy and mirth. 
The night comes. The streets are resplendent with dazzling 
illumination; dazzling indeed to a person who has never seen 
Regent Street or Oxford Street, but by no means to be com-
pared with the scale on which illuminations are carried out at 
the Crystal Palace, except in large towns like Bombay. Men, 
women and children wear their best costumes, almost all of various 
colours, and so form a wonderfully bizarre effect, which harmo-
nizes into kaleidoscopic beauty. This is also the night for wor-
shipping Saraswati, the goddess of learning. Merchants start their 
new ledgers, by making the first entry. The officiating priest, the 
ubiquitous Brahmin, mutters some prayers and invokes the god-
dess. 
At the end of the worship, the children, who are only too 
impatient, set the fireworks ablaze; and as this worship generally 
takes place at a fixed time, the streets resound with the popping 
and fizzing and cracking of fireworks. Pious people then go to the 
temples, but here too there is nothing to be seen but mirth and 
glee, dazzling light and splendour. 
The following day, i.e., the new year's day, is the day of pay-
ing and receiving visits. Kitchen fires are put out on this day, 
so that people eat the cold food which has been previously pre-
32 
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI 
pared. But the glutton by no means starves, for there is such 
profusion that though he eats and eats again there is yet plenty 
and to spare. 
Well-to-do classes buy and cook every sort of 
vegetables, corn and pulse, and taste them all on the new 
year's day. 
The second day of the new year is comparatively a quiet 
day. Kitchen fires are now re-lighted. Light food is generally 
taken after the heavy meals of the previous days. There is no 
display of fireworks except by some mischievous children. Illumi-
nation, too, is on a smaller scale. With the second day the Divali 
holidays are practically over. 
Let us see how these holidays affect society, and how many 
desirable things people do unwittingly. Generally, all the family 
members try to meet together for the holidays at their chief place 
of residence. 
The husband always tries to get home to his wife 
again, even though his business may have taken him away the 
whole of the previous year. The father travels a great distance to 
meet his children. The son, if abroad, comes back from his school 
and so a general reunion always takes place. Then all who can 
afford it have new suits of clothes. Among the richer classes orna-
ments, too, are ordered especially for the occasion. 
Even old 
family quarrels are patched up. At any rate a serious attempt is 
made to do so. Houses are repaired and whitewashed. Old furni-
ture, which was lying packed up in a wooden case, is taken out, 
cleaned, and used for decorating the rooms for the time being. 
Old debts, if any, are paid up whenever possible. 
Everyone is 
supposed to buy some new thing, which almost always takes 
the form of a metallic vessel, or some such thing, for the new 
year's day. Alms are freely given. Persons not very careful about 
offering prayers or visiting temples are now doing both. 
On holidays no one is to quarrel with or swear at any other 
—a pernicious habit very much in vogue, particularly among the 
lower classes. In a word, everything is quiet and joyful. Life, in-
stead of being burdensome, is perfectly enjoyable. 
It will be 
easily seen that good and far-reaching consequences cannot fail to 
flow from such holidays, which some cry down as a relic of 
superstition and tomfoolery, though in reality they are a boon to 
mankind, and tend to relieve a great deal the dull monotony of life 
among the toiling millions. 
Though the Divali holidays are common to the whole of 
India, the mode of observing them varies in point of details in 
different parts. Moreover, this is but an imperfect description of 
the greatest festival of the Hindus. 
And it must not be supposed 
SOME INDIAN FESTIVALS-III 
33 
that there is no abusing of the holidays. Like every other thing, 
this festival, too, may have, and probably has, its black side, but 
that had better be left alone. Certainly the good that it does far 
outweighs the evil. 
The Vegetarian, 4-4-1891 
