15. 
SOME INDIAN FESTIVALS–III 
Next in importance to the Divali holidays are the Holi holi-
days, which were alluded to in The Vegetarian of the 28th March. 
Holi holidays, as will be remembered, correspond to Easter 
in point of time. Holi takes place on the full-moon day of the 
fifth month, Falgun, of the Hindu year. 
This is just the spring-
time. Trees are budding forth. Warm clothes are put off. Light 
clothes are the fashion. That the spring has come is even more 
manifest when we have a peep at one of the temples. The moment 
you enter a temple (and you must be a Hindu in order to gain 
admittance thereinto), you smell nothing but sweet flowers. Pious 
persons are sitting on the steps, making garlands for Thakorji (god). 
Among the flowers you see beautiful roses, champeli, moghra, etc. 
When the doors are flung open for darshan (literally, seeing), you 
observe the fountains in full play. You enjoy soft and fragrant 
breezes. Thakorji has worn light costumes of delicate shades. Piles 
of flowers before him, and garlands round his neck, almost hide 
him from your view. 
He is swung to and fro. The swing, too, 
is covered with green leaves sprinkled with fragrant waters. 
Outside the temple the sight is not edifying. You here meet 
with nothing but obscene language during the fortnight preced-
ing the Holi. 
In small villages, it is difficult for ladies to appear 
without being bespattered with mud. They are the subject of ob-
scene remarks. The same treatment is meted out to men with-
out distinction. People form themselves into small parties. Then one 
party competes with another in using obscene language and 
singing obscene songs. All persons—men and children, but not 
women—take part in these revolting contests. 
Indeed, it is not considered bad taste to use obscene words 
during this season. In places where people are steeped in igno-
rance they even pelt one another. They paint obscene words on 
your clothes, and if you wear a white garment and go out, you 
are sure to return home with plenty of mud about you. 
This 
reaches its climax on the Holi day. Whether you are in the house 
or out of it, obscene words are jarring on your ears. If you happen 
1-3 
34 
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI 
to visit a friend, you are sure to be bathed in foul water, or in 
fragrant water, as the case may be. 
In the evening, a big pile of wood or dried cow-dung is made 
and set on fire. 
These piles are often as high as twenty feet or 
more. And the pieces of wood used are so thick that the fire is 
not extinguished for seven or eight days. On the day following, 
people heat water on these fires and bathe with it. 
So far I have spoken of the way in which the Holi holidays 
are abused. It is a relief to be able to say that with the progress 
of education and civilization such scenes are slowly, though surely, 
dying out. But the richer and refined classes use these holidays 
in a very decent way. Coloured water and fragrant waters take 
the place of mud. Throwing pails of water is replaced here by a 
little sprinkling only. Orange coloured water is most used during 
these days. It is made by boiling dried flowers, called kesuda, which 
have the colour of an orange. Rose water, too, is used where people 
can afford it. 
Friends and 
relations meet and feast one an-
other, and thus enjoy the spring in merriment. 
In many respects, the Divali holidays present a beautiful con-
trast to the, for the most part, unholy Holi holidays. Divali holi-
days begin soon after the monsoon season which is also the time 
of fasting. So the feasting during the Divali holidays is all the more 
enjoyable. While the Holi holidays follow the winter which is 
the time for taking concentrated foods of all sorts, such foods are 
left off during the Holi holidays. Obscene language of Holi fol-
lows the most sacred songs of the Divali. Then again people begin 
to wear winter clothes in the Divali, while they put these off in 
the Holi. 
The Divali proper takes place on the fifteenth day of 
the dark half of the month Ashwin and consequently there is much 
illumination; while on account of the Holi taking place on the 
full-moon day, illumination would be out of place. 
The Vegetarian, 25-4-1891 
