16. 
THE FOODS OF INDIA1 
Before I proceed to the subject of my address I should like to 
tell you what are my qualifications for undertaking the task. When 
Mill wrote the History of India, he, in his most interesting pre-
face, pointed out how he was qualified to write the book, though 
he had never been to India, and was ignorant of the Indian 
languages. So I think that in following his example, I shall be 
doing just what I ought to do. Of course, the very idea of refer-
ring to one's qualifications for any task argues some sort of un-
fitness on the part of the speaker or writer, and I confess that I 
am not the person to speak upon the "Foods of India". I have 
undertaken the task not because I am thoroughly competent to 
speak on the subject but because I thought I would thereby be 
doing a service to the cause that both you and I have at heart. 
My remarks are chiefly derived from my experience of the Bom-
bay Presidency. Now, as you know, India is a vast peninsula popu-
lated by two hundred and eighty-five million souls. It is as large 
as Europe less Russia. In such a country, the customs and man-
ners in different parts must be necessarily different. So, if in future 
you hear anything different from what I am going to say, I 
request you to bear in mind the above fact. As a general rule, 
my remarks will apply to the whole of India. 
I shall divide the subject into three parts. In the first place 
I shall say something, by way of preliminary, about the people 
who live upon the foods; secondly, I shall describe the foods; and 
thirdly, their uses, etc. 
It is commonly believed that all the inhabitants of India are 
vegetarians, but this is not true; and for that matter even all the 
Hindus are not vegetarians. But it is quite true to say that the 
great majority of the inhabitants of India are vegetarians. Some 
of them are so because of their religion, while others are com-
pelled to live on vegetable foods because they cannot afford to 
pay for meat. This will be quite clear to you when I tell you 
1 The Vegetarian, 
6-5-1891, reported: "Saturday May 2nd, bloomsbury 
Hall, Hart Street, Bloomsbury . . . Mrs. Harrison was followed by Mr. M. K. 
Gandhi. . . . After congratulating the previous speaker and apologizing for his 
paper, which was entitled 'The Foods of India', he began to read it. 
He 
was rather nervous in the beginning." The text given here is of the paper re-
read at the Portsmouth meeting of the Vegetarian Society. 
36 
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI 
that there are millions in India who live upon one pice—i.e., one-
third of a penny—a day, and even in a poverty-stricken country 
like India you cannot get eatable meat for that sum. These poor 
people have only one meal per day, and that consists of stale bread 
and salt, a heavily taxed article. But Indian vegetarians and meat-
eaters are quite different from English vegetarians and meat-eat-
ers. Indian meat-eaters, unlike English meat-eaters, do not believe 
that they will die without meat. So far as my knowledge goes, 
they (the Indian meat-eaters) do not consider meat a necessary 
of life but a mere luxury. If they can get their roti, as bread is gene-
rally called there, they get on very well without their meat. But 
look at our English meat-eater; he thinks that he must have his 
meat. 
Bread simply helps him to eat meat, while the Indian 
meat-eater thinks that meat will help him to eat his bread. 
I was talking the other day to an English lady on the ethics 
of diet, and she exclaimed, while I was telling her how even she 
could easily become a vegetarian, "Say what you will, I must 
have my meat, I am so fond of it, and am positively sure I can-
not live without it." 
"But, madam," I said, "suppose that you 
were compelled to live on a strictly vegetable diet, how would you 
manage then?" "Oh," she said, "don't talk of that. I know I 
could not be compelled to do so, and if I were I should feel 
very uncomfortable." Of course, no one can blame the lady for 
so saying. Society is in such a position for the present that it is 
impossible for any meat-eater to leave off eating meat without 
much difficulty. 
In the same manner, an Indian vegetarian is quite diffe-
rent from an English one. The former simply abstains from any-
thing that involves the destroying of a life, or a would-be life, and 
he goes no further. 
Therefore he does not take eggs, because he 
thinks that in taking an egg he would kill a would-be life. (I am 
sorry to say I have been taking eggs for about a month and half.) 
But he does not hesitate to use milk and butter. He even uses 
these animal products, as they are called here, on fruit days, 
which occur every fortnight. On these days he is forbidden wheat, 
rice, etc., but he can use as much butter and milk as he likes; 
while, as we know, some of the vegetarians here discard butter 
and milk, some do away with cooking, and some even try to live 
on fruits and nuts. 
I will now pass to the description of our different foods. I must 
say that I shall not dwell upon the flesh foods at all, as these, 
even where they are used, do not form the staple article of food. 
India is pre-eminently an agricultural country, and a very large 
THE FOODS OF INDIA 
37 
one. So its products are numerous and varied. Though the founda-
tion of the British rule in India dates from the year 1746 A.D., 
and though India was known to the English much earlier than 
1746, it is a pity that so little should be known of the foods of 
India in England. We have not to go very far to seek the cause. 
Almost all Englishmen who go to India keep up their own way 
of living. 
They not only insist on having the things they had 
in England, but will also have them cooked in the same way. It 
is not for me here to go into the why and wherefore of all these 
incidents. One would have thought that they would look into the 
habits of the people, if only out of curiosity, but they have done 
nothing of the kind, and hence we see the result of their stolid in-
difference in the loss to many Anglo-Indians of the finest op-
portunities of studying the food question. To return to the foods, 
there are many kinds of corn produced in India which are abso-
lutely unknown here. 
Wheat, however, is, of course, of the greatest importance there 
as here. Then there are bajara (which is called millet by the 
Anglo-Indians), joar, rice, etc. These are what I should call 
bread foods, because they are chiefly used for bread-making. 
Wheat, of course, is greatly used, but it being comparatively 
dear, bajara and joar take its place among the poor classes. This 
is very much so in the southern and the northern provinces. Speak-
ing of the southern provinces, in his Indian History, Sir W. W. 
Hunter1 says: "The food of the common people consists chiefly 
of small grains, such as joar, bajara, ragi." Of the north, he says: 
"The two last (i.e., joar and bajara) form the food of the masses, 
rice being only grown on irrigated lands and consumed by the 
rich." It is not at all unusual to find persons who have not 
tasted joar. Joar being the diet of the poor, it is held in reve-
rence, as it were. Instead of good-bye as the parting salute, the 
poor in India say 'joar', which, when extended and translated, 
would, I think, mean: "May you never be without 'joar' ."2 The 
rice, too, is used for bread-making, especially in Bengal. The Ben-
galees use rice more than wheat. 
In other parts, rice, as an 
1 (1840-1900), served in India for 25 years; wrote a number of books 
including Indian Empire. Compiled The Imperial Gazetteer of India in 14 volumes. 
Member of the Viceroy's Legislative Council (1881-87). 
On retirement from 
India became member of the British Committee of the Congress, and from 
1890 contributed to The Times on Indian affairs. 
2 Gandhiji appears to have confused between 'jowar' (the foodgrain) and 
'juhar', a word of salutation in some Indian languages. 
38 
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI 
article for bread-making, is rarely, if ever, used. Chana, or gram 
as it is called by the Anglo-Indians, is sometimes used for the same 
purpose, either in combination with or without wheat. It closely 
resembles peas in taste and shape. This brings me to the various 
kinds of pulses for soup-making, or dal. Gram, peas, lentils, hari-
cot beans, tuar, mug, muth, udad are the chief pulses used for dal. 
Of these, I think, tuar heads the list in popularity. Both these kinds 
of foods are chiefly used when dried. Now I come to the green 
vegetables. It would be useless to give you names of all the vege-
tables. They are so numerous that I am sure there are many of 
them that I do not know. The soil of India is so rich that it can 
produce any vegetable you like. So we may safely say that with a 
proper knowledge of agriculture, the Indian soil may be made to 
produce any vegetable to be found on earth. 
There now remains fruit and nuts. I am sorry to say that the 
proper value of fruits is not known in India. Though it is used 
in abundance, it is used rather as a luxury than anything else. It 
is used more for the sake of its palatable taste than of health. 
Therefore, we do not get such valuable fruits as oranges, apples, 
etc., in plenty; hence they are available only to the rich. But we 
get plenty of seasonal fruits and dried fruits. Summer in India, as 
everywhere, is the best season for the former. Of these, the mango 
is the most important. 
It is the most delicious fruit I have yet 
tasted. Some have placed the pineapple at the top of the list; 
but a great majority of those who have tasted the mango vote 
in its favour. It remains in season for three months, when it is very 
cheap, and consequently both the rich and the poor can enjoy it. 
I have heard that some even live on mangoes—of course, only 
while they are in season. But, unfortunately, the mango is a fruit 
that will not keep long in a good condition. It resembles the peach 
in taste, and is a stone-fruit. It is often as big as a small melon. 
That brings us to the melons, which are also plentiful in summer. 
They are far superior to what we get here. However, I must not 
inflict any more names of fruits on you; suffice it to say that 
India produces innumerable varieties of seasonal fruits, which do 
not keep long. All these fruits are available to the poor; the pity 
is that they never make a meal of these fruits. 
Generally, we 
believe that fruit causes fever, diarrhoea, etc. 
In summer, when 
we always dread cholera, authorities prohibit—rightly, too, in 
many cases—the sale of melons and other such fruits. As for dried 
fruits, we get almost all the varieties that are to be had here. Of 
nuts we get some varieties which you do not get here; on the other 
hand, some that are to be had here are not seen in India. Nuts 
THE FOODS OF INDIA 
39 
are never used as food in India; and so, properly speaking, they 
should not be included in the "Foods of India". Now, before 
I come to the last division of my subject, I should request you to 
bear in mind the following divisions of foods that I have made: 
first, corn, for bread-making, e.g., wheat, millet, etc.; second, 
pulse, for dal or soup-making; third, green vegetables; fourth, 
fruits; and, fifth and last, nuts. 
Of course, I am not going to give you recipes for cooking 
these different kinds of foods. That is beyond my power. I shall 
tell you the general way in which they are cooked for their pro-
per uses. Diet cure or hygiene is a comparatively recent discovery 
in England. In India we have been practising this from time out 
of mind. Native physicians, no doubt, use drugs, too, but they 
depend more upon change of diet than upon the efficacy of the 
drugs they prescribe. They would ask you not to take salt in cer-
tain cases; in many, they would ask you to abstain from acid 
foods, and so on, every food having its medical value. As for the 
corn for bread-making, it is the most important article of diet. 
For convenience, 
I have called the preparation made of flour 
bread, but cake would be a better name for it. 
I shall not relate 
the whole process of making it, but I may just say that we do 
not throw away the bran. These cakes are always fresh made, and 
generally eaten hot with clarified butter. 
They are to the 
Indians what meat is to the English. The quantity of food a person 
eats is measured according to the number of cakes he eats. Pulse 
and vegetables are left out of account. You may make a meal 
without pulse, without vegetables, but never without cakes. Diffe-
rent preparations, too, are made of the various kinds of corns, 
but they are merely cakes in disguise. 
Pulse for soup-making, e.g., peas, lentils, etc., is prepared by 
simply boiling it in water. But an addition of innumerable condi-
ments makes it a most delicious dish. The art of cooking has full 
play in these foods. I have known peas spiced with salt, pepper, 
turmeric, cloves, cinnamon, and such like. 
The proper use of 
pulse is to help you to eat the cakes. Medically, it is not sup-
posed good to take too much of the pulses. A remark on rice here 
would not be out of place. As I have already said, rice is used 
for bread-making, especially in Bengal. Some of the doctors trace 
the diabetes from which the Bengalees very often suffer to this 
source. No one in India would call rice a nourishing food. It 
is the food of the rich, i.e., of people who do not want to work. 
Labouring men very rarely use rice. Physicians put their feverish 
patients on rice. I have suffered from fever (no doubt by breaking 
40 
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI 
hygienic rules, as Dr. Allinson1 would say), and was put upon a 
diet of rice and mug-water. Recovery was marvellous. 
Next come green vegetables. These are prepared in much the 
same way as pulses. Oil and butter play an important part in the 
preparation of vegetables. Often gram flour is mixed with them. 
Simply boiled vegetables are never eaten. I never saw a boiled 
potato in India. Not infrequently they make a combination of 
many vegetables. 
It is needless to say that India would far outbid 
France in cooking vegetables nicely. 
Their proper use is much 
the same as that of pulse. 
In importance they stand next to it. 
They are more or less a luxury, and are generally supposed to 
be a source of disease. Poor people have hardly one vegetable 
once or twice a week. They would have cakes and dal. Some of 
the vegetables have an excellent medicinal value. There is one 
vegetable called tandalja. It very closely resembles spinach in taste. 
Physicians prescribe it to persons who have indulged in too much 
cayenne pepper and spoiled their eyesight thereby. 
Then come fruits. They are used chiefly on "fruit days", but 
are rarely, if ever, used at the end of ordinary meals. People gene-
rally take them now and then. 
Mango-juice is very greatly used 
in the mango-season. It is eaten with cakes or rice. We never 
cook or stew ripe fruits. We preserve unripe fruits, chiefly man-
goes, while acid. 
Medicinally, fresh fruits, being generally acid, 
are supposed to have a tendency to give fever. 
Dried fruits are 
much used by children, and dried dates deserve some notice. We 
suppose them to be strength-giving, and therefore in winter, 
when we take concentrated foods, we prepare them with milk and 
various other things too numerous to be mentioned, and eat an 
ounce every day. 
Lastly, nuts take the place of English sweets. Children eat a 
great quantity of sugared nuts. They are also largely used on 
"fruit days". We fry them in butter, and even stew them in milk. 
Almonds are supposed to be very good for the brain. I will just 
point out one of the various ways in which we use the cocoanut. 
It is first ground and then mixed with clarified butter and sugar. 
It tastes very nice. I hope some of you will try at home those 
cocoanut sweet balls as they are called. This, ladies and gentlemen, 
is a sketch—a most imperfect sketch—of the foods of India. I hope 
1 Dr. T. R. Allinson, writer on health and hygiene whose works Gandhiji 
found helpful. 
A member of the London Vegetarian Society till he was censured 
for his unorthodox views on birth-control. 
Attended on Gandhiji when he 
had pleurisy in 1914. 
SPEECH AT FAREWELL DINNER 
41 
you will be induced to learn more about them, and I am sure 
you will profit by doing so. In conclusion, I further hope the time 
will come when the great difference now existing between the 
food 
habits of meat-eating in 
England and grain-eating 
in 
India will disappear, and with it some other differences which, 
in some quarters, mar the unity of sympathy that ought to exist 
between the two countries. In the future, I hope we shall tend 
towards unity of custom, and also unity of hearts. 
The Vegetarian Messenger, 1-6-1891 
