19. 
INTERVIEW TO "THE VEGETARIAN"1—I 
Mr. Gandhi was first asked what was the reason which first induced him 
to think of coming over to England and adopting the legal profession. 
In a word, ambition. I matriculated at the Bombay Univer-
sity in the year 1887. Then I joined the Bhavnagar College, for 
unless you graduate at the Bombay University you get no status 
in society. If you want any employment before that, you cannot 
secure unless, of course, you have a very good influence to back 
you up, a respectable post, giving a handsome salary. But I found 
that I would have to spend three years at the least before I could 
graduate. Moreover, I suffered from constant headaches and nose-
bleeding, and this was supposed to be due to the hot climate. And, 
after all, I could not, even after graduating, expect any very great 
income. 
While I was incessantly brooding over these things, an 
old friend of my father saw and advised me to go to England and 
take the robe; he, as it were, fanned the fire that was burn-
ing within me. I thought to myself, "If I go to England not 
only shall I become a barrister (of whom I used to think a great 
deal), but I shall be able to see England, the land of philosophers 
and poets, the very centre of civilization." 
This gentleman had 
great influence with my elders, and so he succeeded in persuading 
them to send me to England. 
This is a very brief statement of my reasons for coming to 
England, but they by no means represent my present views. 
Of course, your friends were all delighted at your ambitious purpose? 
Well, not all. There are friends and friends. Those who were 
my real friends, and of about my age, were very glad to hear that 
I was to go to England. Some were friends, or rather, well-wishers, 
old in years. These sincerely believed that I was going to ruin 
myself, and that I would be a disgrace to my family by going to 
England. Others, however, set up their opposition simply from 
1 To enable Englishmen to appreciate the difficulties confronting Hindus 
intending to proceed to England for studies and to point out to such Hindus 
how the difficulties might be overcome, a representative of The Vegetarian put 
Gandhiji a number of questions. 
INTERVIEW TO "THE VEGETARIAN"‒I 
43 
malice. They had seen some of the barristers who derived fabulous 
incomes, and they were afraid that I might do the same. Some, 
again, there were, who thought that I was too young (I am now 
about twenty-two), or that I should not be able to bear the 
climate. To cut the matter short, no two persons supported or op-
posed my coming on the same grounds. 
How did you set about carrying out your intention? Just tell me, if you 
please, what were your difficulties, and how you overcame them. 
Even to try to tell you the story of my difficulties would fill 
up the whole of your valuable paper. It is a tale of misery and woe. 
The difficulties may well be likened to the heads of Ravana—the 
giant of the second1 great Hindu epic Ramayana, whom Rama, 
the Hero, fought, and ultimately defeated—which were many, and 
which were no sooner chopped off than replaced. They may be 
divided chiefly under four heads, viz., money, consent of my 
elders, separation from relations, and caste restrictions. 
First, then, as to money. Though my father was the prime 
minister of more than one native State, he never hoarded money. 
He spent all that he earned in charity and the education and mar-
riages of his children, so we were practically left without much 
cash. He left some property, and that was all. When asked why he 
did not collect money and set it aside for his children, he used to 
say that his children represented his wealth, and if he hoarded 
much money he would spoil them. So, then, money was no small 
difficulty in my way. I tried for some State scholarship but failed. 
At one place, I was asked to prove my worth by graduating and 
then expect it. Experience teaches me that the gentleman who said 
so was right. Nothing daunted, I requested my eldest brother to 
devote all the money that was left to my education in England. 
Here I cannot help digressing to explain the family system 
that prevails in India. There, unlike as in England, the children 
always, if male, and until marriage, if female, live with their 
parents. What they earn goes to the father, and so also what they 
lose is a loss to the father. Of course, even the male children do 
separate under exceptional circumstances, e.g., in the case of a 
great quarrel. But these are the exceptions. In the legal language 
of Mayne: "Individual property is the rule in the West. Corpo-
rate property is the rule in the East." So, then, I have and had 
no property of my own. Everything was under the control of my 
brother, and we were all living together. 
1 The other great epic is the Mahabharata. 
44 
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI 
To return to the question of money. What little my father 
could leave for me was in the hands of my brother. It could only 
be set free subject to his consent. Moreover, that was not enough, 
so I proposed that the whole capital should be devoted to my edu-
cation. I ask you if any brother would do so here. There are very 
few such brothers in India. He was told that I might prove an 
unworthy brother after imbibing the Western ideas, and that the 
only chance of regaining the money would be in my returning 
alive to India, which was very doubtful. 
But he turned a deaf 
ear to all these reasonable and well-meant warnings. There was 
one, and only one condition attached to the consent to my propo-
sal, viz., that I should get the permission of my mother and my 
uncle. May many persons have such brothers as mine! I then set 
about the allotted task, which I can assure you was uphill 
enough. Fortunately, I was the pet of my mother. She had much 
faith in me, and so I succeeded in getting over her superstition, but 
how was I to make her nod consent to a three years' separation? 
However, by showing the exaggerated advantages of coming to 
England, I got her to accede, with much reluctance, to my request. 
Now for the uncle. He was on the point of going to Benares and 
such other holy places. After three days' incessant persuasion and 
arguments I could get the following answer from him: 
"I am going on a pilgrimage. What you say may be right, 
but how could I willingly say 'yes' to your unholy proposal? 
The only thing I can say is that, if your mother does not mind 
your going, I have no right to interfere." 
This was easily interpreted into 'yes'. Nor were these the 
only two whom I had to please. In India everyone, no matter how 
remotely connected, thinks that he has a right to poke his nose 
into another's affairs. 
But when I had exacted (for it was no-
thing else) acquiescence from the two, the pecuniary difficulties 
almost disappeared. 
The difficulties under the second head are partially discussed 
above. You will, 
perhaps, be 
astonished to hear that I am 
married. (The marriage took place at the age of twelve.) Small 
blame then to my wife's parents if they thought that they had 
a right to interfere if only for the sake of their daughter. Who was 
to look after her? How was she to manage to spend the three years? 
Of course she was to be looked after by my brother. Poor 
brother! According to my ideas at that time, I should have taken 
little notice of their legitimate fears and growlings, had it not been 
that their displeasure would have been reflected on my mother 
and brother. It was no easy task to sit night after night with my 
INTERVIEW TO "THE VEGETARIAN"‒I 
45 
father-in-law and to hear and successfully answer his objections. 
But then I was taught the old proverb, "Patience and perseverance 
overcome mountains", too well to give way. 
When I had the money and the requisite permission, I said 
to myself, "How am I to persuade myself to separate from all that 
is dear and near to me?" 
In India we fight shy of separation. 
Even when I had to go for a few days my mother would weep. 
How, then, was I to witness, without being affected, the heart-
rending scene? 
It is impossible for me to describe the tortures 
that my mind had to suffer. As the day of leave-taking drew near 
I nearly broke down. But I was wise enough not to say this, even 
to my closest friends. I knew that my health was failing. Sleeping, 
waking, drinking, eating, walking, 
running, 
reading, 
I 
was 
dreaming and thinking of England and what I would do on that 
momentous day. At last the day came. 
On the one hand, my 
mother was hiding her eyes, full of tears, in her hands, but the 
sobbing was clearly heard. On the other, I was placed among a 
circle of some fifty friends. "If I wept they would think me too 
weak; perhaps they would not allow me to go to England," 
soliloquized I; therefore I did not weep, even though my heart was 
breaking. Last, but not least, came the leave-taking with my wife. 
It would be contrary to custom for me to see or talk to her in 
the presence of friends. So I had to see her in a separate room. 
She, of course, had begun sobbing long before. I went to her and 
stood like a dumb statue for a moment. I kissed her, and she 
said, "Don't go". 
What followed I need not describe. This 
done, my anxieties were not over. It was but the beginning of 
the end. The leave-taking was only half done, for I parted with 
the mother and the wife in Rajkot—where I was educated—but 
my brother and friends came to see me off as far as Bombay. The 
scene that took place there was no less affecting. 
The collisions with my caste fellows in Bombay defy descrip-
tion, for Bombay is the place where they chiefly live. In Rajkot I 
did not meet with any such opposition worthy of the name. 
It 
was my misfortune to live in the heart of the city of Bombay, 
where they most abound, so I was hemmed in on all sides. I could 
not go out without being pointed and stared at by someone or 
other. At one time, while I was walking near the Town Hall, I 
was surrounded and hooted by them, and my poor brother had to 
look at the scene in silence. The culminating point was reached 
when a huge meeting of the caste fellows was summoned by the 
chief representatives. Every member of the caste was called upon 
to attend the meeting, under pain of forfeiting a fine of five 
46 
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI 
annas. I may here mention that, before this step was determined 
upon, I was pestered with many deputations from them without 
avail. 
At this great meeting, I was seated in the centre of the 
audience. The Patels, as the representatives are called, remon-
strated with me very strongly and reminded me of their connec-
tion with my father. It may be mentioned that all this was quite 
a unique experience to me. They literally dragged me out of 
seclusion, for I was not accustomed to such things. Moreover, my 
position became more precarious on account of an extreme shyness. 
Seeing that remonstrance fell flat on me, the head Patel addressed 
me (in effect) in the following words: 
"We were your father's 
friends, and therefore we feel for you; as heads of the caste you 
know our power. We are positively informed that you will have to 
eat flesh and drink wine in England; moreover, you have to cross 
the waters; all this you must know is against our caste rules. 
Therefore we command you to reconsider your decision, or else 
the heaviest punishment will be meted out to you. 
What have 
you to say to this?" 
I replied in the following words: "I thank you for your warn-
ings. I am sorry that I cannot alter my decision. 
What I have 
heard about England is quite different from what you say; one 
need not take meat and wine there. As for crossing the waters, 
if our brethren can go as far as Aden, why could not I go to 
England? 
I am deeply convinced that malice is at the root of 
all these objections." 
"Very well, then," replied the worthy Patel in anger, "You 
are not the son of your father." Then, turning to the audience, 
he went on: "This boy has lost his sense, and we command 
everyone not to have anything to do with him. He who will sup-
port him in any way or go to see him off will be treated as an 
outcaste, and if the boy ever returns, let him know that he shall 
never be taken into the caste." 
These words fell like a bombshell upon all. Even the chosen 
few who had supported me through thick and thin left me alone. 
I had a great mind to answer the childish taunt, but was preven-
ted from so doing by my brother. Thus even though I got out 
of the ordeal safely, my position became worse than ever. Even 
my brother began to vacillate, though only for a moment. He was 
reminded of the threat that the pecuniary support from him 
would cost him not only the money, but his membership of the 
caste. So although he did not say anything to me in person, he 
asked some of his friends to persuade me either to reconsider my 
decision or to defer its execution till the fury had subsided. There 
INTERVIEW TO "THE VEGETARIAN"‒I 
47 
could be but one answer from me, and ever since that he never 
flinched, and, in fact, he has not been excommunicated; but the 
end had not come yet. The intrigues of the caste fellows were 
always at work. They almost seemed to have scored this time, for 
they could put off my going for a fortnight. They carried it out 
thuswise. We went to see a captain of a steamship company, who 
was requested to say that it would be unwise for me to leave 
during that time—August—because of the rough weather in the 
sea. My brother would consent to anything but this. Unfortu-
nately, this was the first voyage that I had undertaken, so no one 
knew whether I was a good sailor or not, so I was helpless. Much 
against my will I had to put off the departure. I thought the 
whole structure would fall to the ground. My brother, having left 
a note to a friend, requesting him to give me the passage money 
when the time came, took leave. 
The parting scene was simi-
lar to the one described above. Now I was left alone in Bombay 
without money to buy the passage. Every hour that I had to 
wait seemed a year. In the meanwhile I heard that another Indian 
gentleman1 was about to leave for England; this news was god-
send to me. I thought I would be allowed to go now. I made 
use of the note, and was refused the money. I had to make pre-
parations within twenty-four hours; I was in a dreadful flutter. 
Without money I felt as if I was a bird without wings. 
A friend 
whom I shall always thank came to the rescue and advanced the 
passage money. I bought the ticket, telegraphed to my brother, and 
sailed for England on the 4th September, 1888. 
Such were my 
chief difficulties, which spread over nearly five months. It was a 
time of terrible anxiety and torture. Now hopeful, and now des-
pondent, I dragged along always trying my best, and then de-
pending upon God to show me the cherished goal. 
The Vegetarian, 13-6-1891 
1 Mazmudar; vide "London Diary", 12-11-1888. 
