20. INTERVIEW TO "THE VEGETARIAN"‒II 
On your arrival in England, of course, you were face to face with the 
flesh-eating problem; how did you solve it? 
I was overwhelmed with gratuitous advice. 
Well-meaning 
yet ignorant friends thrust their opinions into unwilling eats. The 
majority of them said I could not do without meat in the cold 
climate. I would catch consumption. Mr. Z went to England and 
caught it on account of his foolhardiness. Others said I might 
do without flesh but without wine I could not move. 
I would 
be numbed with cold. One went so far as to advise me to take 
eight bottles of whisky, for I should want them after leaving 
Aden. 
Another wanted me to smoke, for his friend was obliged 
to smoke in England. Even medical men, those who had been 
to England, told the same tale. But as I wanted to come at any 
price, I replied that I would try my best to avoid all these things, 
but if they were found to be absolutely necessary I did not know 
what I should do. I may here mention that my aversion to meat 
was not so strong then as it is now. 
I was even betrayed into 
taking meat about six or seven times at the period when I al-
lowed my friends to think for me. But in the steamer my ideas 
began to change. I thought I should not take meat on any ac-
count. 
My mother before consenting to my departure exacted 
a promise from me not to take meat. So I was bound not to take 
it, if only for the sake of the promise. The fellow-passengers in the 
steamer began to advise us (the friend who was with me and 
myself) to try it. 
They said I would require it after leaving Aden. 
When this 
turned out untrue, I was to require it after crossing the Red Sea. 
And on this proving false, a fellow-passenger said, "The weather 
has not been severe, but in the Bay of Biscay you will have to 
choose between death, and meat and wine." That crisis too passed 
away safely. In London, too, I had to hear such remonstrances. 
For months I did not come across any vegetarian. I passed many 
anxious days arguing with a friend about the sufficiency of the 
vegetable diet; but at that time having but little knowledge of 
arguments other than humanitarian in favour 
of vegetaria-
nism, I got the worst of it as the friend scouted the idea of huma-
nity in such discussions. At last I sealed his tongue by telling him 
I would sooner die than break the promise to my mother. 
INTERVIEW TO "THE VEGETARIAN"‒II 
49 
"Humph," said he, "childishness, rank superstition; but since, 
even after coming here, you are superstitious enough to believe 
in such nonsense, I cannot help you any more, I only wish you 
had not come to England." 
He never afterwards pressed the point seriously, except per-
haps once, though ever since that he took me for little more than 
a fool. In the meanwhile I remembered once to have passed by a 
vegetarian restaurant (it was the "Porridge Bowl"). 
I asked a 
gentleman to direct me there, but instead of reaching there I saw 
the "Central" restaurant, and went there and had some porridge 
for the first time. I did not at first enjoy it, but I liked the pie 
which I had for the second course. 
It was there that I first 
bought some vegetarian literature among which was a copy of 
A Plea for Vegetarianism by H. S. Salt, after reading which I 
adopted vegetarianism from principle. 
Till then I considered flesh to be a superior diet from a 
scientific point of view. Moreover, it was there that I came to 
know the existence of the Vegetarian Society of Manchester. But 
I did not take any active interest in it. I did, now and then, read 
The Vegetarian Messenger and that was all. 
My knowledge of The 
Vegetarian dates from a year and a half. 
It was at the Inter-
national Vegetarian Congress that I may be said to have known 
the L.V.S1. 
That the Congress was sitting I knew by the kind 
courtesy of Mr. Josiah Oldfield, who heard of me from a friend, 
and was good enough to ask me to attend it. 
In conclusion, I 
am bound to say that, during my nearly three years' stay in Eng-
land, I have left many things undone, and have done many things 
which perhaps I might better have left undone, yet I carry one 
great consolation with me that I shall go back without having 
taken meat or wine, and that I know from personal experience 
that there are so many vegetarians in England. 
The Vegetarian, 20-6-1891 
1 London Vegetarian Society 
1-4 
