22. 
ON WAY HOME TO INDIA-I 
It was on the 12th June, 1891, that I left for Bombay after 
three years' stay in England. A beautiful day it was: the sun 
shone brilliantly; no overcoat was needed to keep off the cold 
breezes. 
It was at 11.45 that an express train carrying the passengers 
left the Liverpool Street Station for the docks. 
I could not make myself believe that I was going to India 
until I stepped into the steamship Oceana, of the P. & O. Com-
pany. So much attached was I to London and its environments; 
for who would not be? 
London with its teaching institutions, 
ON WAY HOME TO INDIA-I 
51 
public galleries, museums, theatres, vast commerce, public parks 
and vegetarian restaurants, is a fit place for a student and a 
traveller, a trader and a "faddist"—as a vegetarian would be 
called by his opponents. Thus, it was not without deep regret 
that I left dear London. At the same time I was glad because I 
was to see my friends and relations in India after such a long time. 
Oceana is an Australian steamer, one of the largest boats of 
the Company. She weighs 6,188 tons and her horse-power is 1,200. 
When we stepped into this vast floating island, we were treated 
to a good refreshing tea, to which all (passengers and friends 
alike) did justice. I must not omit to say that the tea was served 
gratis. At this time, a stranger would have taken them all for 
passengers (and they were a goodly number), from the ease with 
which they were taking their tea; but, when the bell rang to in-
form the friends of the passengers that the ship was going to 
weigh anchor, the number appreciably melted away. There was 
much cheering and waving of handkerchiefs when 
the ship 
steamed off the harbour. 
It may be well here to contrast the Oceana with the Assam 
into which the Bombay-bound passengers had to tranship at 
Aden. There were English waiters on the Oceana, always neat, 
clean and obliging. On the other hand, there were Portuguese 
waiters on board the Assam, who murdered the Queen's English, 
and who were always the reverse of clean, and also sulky and slow. 
There was, moreover, a difference of quality in the food 
supplied in the two steamers. This was evident from the way in 
which the passengers were grumbling in the Assam. 
Nor was 
this all. The accommodation in the Oceana far outdid that in the 
Assam; this, however, the company could not help; they could 
not throw away the latter because the former was better. 
How did the vegetarians manage in the ship? 
This would 
be an apt question. 
Well, there were only two vegetarians, including myself. 
Both of us were prepared, in case we did not get anything better, 
to manage with boiled potatoes, cabbage and butter. But we had 
no reason to go to that extreme. The obliging steward gave us 
some vegetable curry, rice, stewed and fresh fruit from the first 
saloon, and last, but not least, brown bread; so we had all we 
wanted. Undoubtedly, they are very liberal in giving good and 
sufficient food to the passengers. Only, they go too far; so at least 
it seems to me. 
It would not be amiss to describe what the second-saloon 
menus contained, and how many meals the passengers had. 
52 
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA 
GANDHI 
To begin with, the first thing in the morning, an average 
passenger would have a cup or two of tea and a few biscuits. At 
8.30 a.m. the breakfast bell would bring down the passengers to the 
dining-room. They were punctual to the minute, at their meals, 
at any rate. 
The breakfast menu generally contained oatmeal 
porridge, some fish, chop, curry, jam, bread and butter, tea or 
coffee, etc., everything ad libitum. 
I have often seen passengers take porridge, fish and curry, 
bread and butter, and wash down with two or three cups of tea. 
Hardly had we time to digest the breakfast, when, bang, — 
it was the dinner bell at 1.30 p.m. The dinner was as good as 
breakfast: plenty of mutton and vegetables, rice and curry, pastry, 
and what not. Two days of the week, all the second-saloon pas-
sengers were served with fruit and nuts in addition to the ordi-
nary dinner. But this, too, was not sufficient. The dinner fare 
was so easily digestible that we wanted a "refreshing" cup of tea 
and biscuits at 4 p.m. Well, but the evening breezes seemed so 
soon to take away all the effect of "that little" cup of tea that 
we were served a "high tea" at 6.30 p.m.: bread and butter, jam 
or marmalade, or both, salad, chops, tea, coffee, etc. The sea-air 
seemed to be so very salubrious that the passengers could not retire 
to bed before taking a few, a very few—only eight or ten, fifteen 
at the most—biscuits, a little cheese and some wine or beer. 
In 
the light of the above, are not the following lines too true: 
Your belly is your God, your stomach is your temple, your paunch 
is your altar, your cook is your priest. . . . It is in the cooking-pots that 
your love is inflamed, it is in the kitchen that your faith grows fervid, it 
is in the flesh-dishes that all hope lies hid. . . . Who is held in so much 
esteem with you as the frequent giver of dinners, as the sumptuous enter-
tainer, as the practised toaster of healths? 
The second saloon was pretty full of passengers of all sorts. 
There were soldiers, clergymen, barbers, sailors, students, officials 
and, maybe, adventurers. There were three or four ladies. 
We 
beguiled our time chiefly in eating and drinking. The rest of the 
time was either dozed away or passed in chatting, at times in dis-
cussing, in playing games, etc. But after two or three days, the 
time between the meals seemed to hang heavy in spite of dis-
cussions and cards and scandals. 
Some of us really warmed to the work and got up concerts, 
tugs-of-war, and running races for prizes. One evening was devo-
ted to concerts and speeches. 
ON WAY HOME TO INDIA‒II 
53 
Now, I thought it was time for me to poke my nose in. I 
requested the secretary of the committee, who managed those 
things, to give me a quarter of an hour for a short speech on 
vegetarianism. 
The secretary obligingly nodded 
consent 
to 
my request. 
Well, I made grand preparations. I thought out and then 
wrote out and re-wrote the speech that was to be delivered. 
I 
well knew that I had to meet a hostile audience, and that I should 
take care that my speech did not send my audience to sleep. The 
secretary had asked me to be humorous. I told him that I might 
be nervous, but humorous I could not be. 
Now, what do you think became of the speech? 
The second 
concert never came off, and so the speech was never delivered, 
to my great mortification. I fancy it was because no one seem-
ed to enjoy the first evening, for we had no Pitts and Glad-
stones in the second saloon. 
However, I succeeded in discussing vegetarianism with two 
or three passengers, who heard me calmly, and answered in effect, 
"We grant you the argument; but so long as we feel happy on 
our present diet (never mind about our being dyspeptic at times), 
we cannot give it a trial!" 
One of them, seeing that my vegetarian friend and I got 
nice fruits every day, did give the V .E. M. diet a trial, but the 
chop was too great a temptation for him. 
Poor man! 
The Vegetarian, 9-4-1892 
