23. 
ON WAY HOME TO INDIA-II 
Moreover, as an instance of affability between passengers 
and of politeness on the part of the first-saloon passengers, the 
second-saloon passengers were often invited to witness the thea-
tricals and dances that they got up from time to time. 
They had some very nice ladies and gentlemen in the first 
saloon. But it would not do to have all play and no quarrel, so 
some of the passengers thought fit to get drunk (beg your pardon, 
Mr. Editor, they got drunk almost every evening, but this parti-
cular evening they got drunk and disorderly). 
They, it seems, 
were discussing with one another over a glass of whisky, when 
some of them used improper language. Then followed a fight of 
words culminating in a fight of blows. The matter was reported 
54 
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI 
to the captain. He reproved these pugilistic gentlemen, and ever 
since then we had no more rows. 
Thus, dividing our time between eating and amusements, 
we moved onward. 
After two days' voyage, the steamer passed by, but did not 
touch, 
Gibraltar. 
This caused much disappointment, 
mostly 
among smokers, who wanted to get tobacco, duty-free in Gibral-
tar, as some of us had entertained a hope the steamer would cast 
anchor. 
The next place reached was Malta. It being a coaling sta-
tion, the steamer stops there for about nine hours. Almost all the 
passengers went ashore. 
Malta is a beautiful island without the London smoke. The 
construction of houses is different. We had a look round the Gover-
nor's palace. The armoury is well worth a visit. Napoleon's car-
riage is on view there. You see there some beautiful paintings 
too. The market is not bad. The fruit is cheap. The cathedral is 
magnificent. 
We had a nice drive of about six miles to the orange gar-
den. There you see some thousands of orange trees and some 
ponds with gold fish. The drive was very cheap, only 2s. 6d. 
What a wretched place Malta is for beggars! You cannot go 
along the road quietly without being pestered by a crowd of dirty-
looking beggars. Some would offer to be your guides, others would 
offer to take you to shops where you could buy cigars or the famous 
Maltese sweet nougat. 
From Malta we reached Brindisi. It is a good harbour and 
that is all. You cannot pass a single day in amusement. We had 
about nine hours or more at our disposal, but we could not uti-
lize even four. 
After Brindisi we reached Port Said. 
There we took final 
leave of Europe and the Mediterranean. Of course, there is no-
thing to be seen in Port Said, unless you want to see the dregs of 
society. It is full of rogues and rascals. 
From Port Said the steamer moves along very slowly, for we 
enter the Suez Canal of M. de Lesseps. It is a distance of eighty-
seven miles. The steamer took nearly twenty-four hours to travel 
that distance. We were close to the land on both sides. The strip 
of water is so narrow that two steamers cannot go abreast except 
at certain places. At night the sight is charming. All the ships are 
required to light electric lights in front and these are very power-
ful. The scene when two pass one another is very pleasant. The 
electric light you get from the opposite ship is simply dazzling. 
ON WAY HOME TO INDIA‒II 
55 
We passed the Ganges. We raised three cheers for her, which 
were heartily returned by the passengers on board the Ganges. The 
town Suez is at the other end of the canal. The steamer hardly 
stops there for half an hour. 
Now we entered the Red Sea. 
It was a three days' voyage 
but it was most trying. It was unbearably hot. Not only was it 
impossible to remain inside the steamer, but it was too hot even on 
the deck. Here, for the first time, we felt that we were going to 
India to face the hot climate. 
We had some breezes when we reached Aden. Here, we (the 
passengers for Bombay) had to tranship into the Assam. 
It was 
like leaving London for a miserable village. The Assam is hardly 
half as big as the Oceana. 
Misfortunes never come single; with the Assam we had a 
stormy ocean, because it was the monsoon season. 
The Indian 
Ocean is generally calm, so during monsoon it is stormy with a 
vengeance. We had to pass five days more on the waters before we 
reached Bombay. The second night brought the real storm. Many 
were sick. If I ventured out on the deck I was splashed with 
water. There goes a crash; something is broken. In the cabin 
you cannot sleep quietly. The door is banging. Your bags begin 
to dance. You roll in your bed. You sometimes feel as if the ship 
is sinking. At the dinner table you are no more comfortable. The 
steamer rolls on your side. Your forks and spoons are in your 
lap, even the cruet stand and the soup plate; your napkin is dyed 
yellow and so on. 
One morning I asked the steward if that was what he would 
call a real storm, and he said: "No, sir, this is nothing," and, 
waving his arm, showed me how the steamer would roll in a real 
storm. 
Thus tossed up and down, we reached Bombay on July 5th. 
It was raining very hard and so it was difficult going ashore. 
However, we reached the shore safely, and bade good-bye to the 
Assam. 
What a human cargo was on the Oceana, and the Assam! 
Some were going to make fortunes in Australia in high hopes; 
some, having finished their studies in England, were going to 
India in order to earn a decent living. Some were called away 
by a sense of duty, some were going to meet their husbands in 
Australia or India, as the case may be, and some were adven-
turers who, being disappointed at home, were going to pursue 
their adventures, God knows where. 
56 
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI 
Were the hopes of all realized? That is the question. How 
hopeful, yet how often disappointed, is the human mind! 
We 
live in hopes. 
The Vegetarian, 16-4-1892 
