24. LETTER TO RANCHHODLAL PATWARI 
BOMBAY, 
September 5, 1892 
MY DEAR PATWARI, 
I thank you for your kind letter and the advice you have 
given me. 
As I told you in my last p.c., I have to postpone going abroad 
for practice. My brother is very much against it. He thinks that 
I need not despair of getting a decent livelihood in Kathyawar 1 
and that without directly taking part in the khutput 2. However 
this may be, since he is so hopeful and is entitled to every consi-
deration from me, I shall follow his advice. 
Here, too, I have 
been promised some work. So I intend to be here for about two 
months at least. I do not think my accepting a literary post will 
materially interfere with my legal studies. On the other hand, 
such a work will add to my knowledge that cannot but be in-
directly useful in practice. Moreover, thereby I can work with 
a more concentrated mind free from worry, but where is the 
post? Not an easy thing to get one. 
Of course, I asked for a loan on the strength of the promise 
you made me while at Rajkot. I entirely agree with you that your 
father should not know of it. Never mind about it now. I shall 
try somewhere else. 
I can easily understand that you cannot 
have a large surplus from one year's practice. 
My brother has been retained in Sachin as Secretary to the 
Nawab of Sachin. He has gone to Rajkot and will return in a few 
days. 
I am glad to hear from Kashidas that he will settle in Dhan-
dhuka. 
The caste opposition is as great as ever. Everything depends 
upon one man who will try his best never to allow me to enter 
the caste. I am not so very sorry for myself as I am for the 
1 Kathiawar, also known as Saurashtra, a collection of former princely 
States, or principalities in Gujarat 
2 Machinations, in Gujarati 
LETTER TO "THE NATAL ADVERTISER" 
57 
caste fellows who follow the authority of one man like sheep. They 
have been passing some meaningless resolutions and betraying 
their malice clearly in overdoing their part. Religion, of course, 
finds no place in their arguments. 
Is it not almost better not 
to have anything to do with such fellows than to fawn upon them 
and wheedle their fame so that I might be considered one of 
them? However, I have to move with the times. 
I was very glad to hear of Vrajlalbhai becoming Karbhari1 
somewhere in Gujarat. 
You write such a nice hand that I have been induced to imi-
tate you though but imperfectly. 
Yours sincerely, 
M. 
K. GANDHI 
From the original 
