25. LETTER TO "THE NATAL ADVERTISER" 
DURBAN, 
May 26, 1893 
TO 
THE EDITOR 
The Natal Advertiser 
SIR, 
I was startled to read a paragraph in your today's issue refer-
ring to myself, under the heading, "An Unwelcome Visitor".2 I 
am very sorry if His Worship the Magistrate looked at me with 
disapproval. 
It is true that on entering the Court I neither 
removed my head-dress nor salaamed, but in so doing I had not 
the slightest idea that I was offending His Worship, or meaning 
1 Administrator 
2 The reference was as follows: "An Indian entered the Court House 
yesterday afternoon and took a seat at the horseshoe. 
He was well-dressed, 
and it was understood that he was an English barrister, on his way to 
Pretoria, where he is reported to be engaged in an Indian case. 
He entered 
the Court without removing his head-covering or salaaming, and the Magi-
strate looked at him with disapproval. 
The new arrival was courteously 
asked his business, and he replied that he was an English barrister. 
He did 
not attempt to present his credentials, and, on returning to the horseshoe, 
was quietly told that the proper course for him to pursue, before taking up 
his position at the Bar, was to gain admission to the Supreme Court." The 
incident was reported in The Natal Mercury, 26-5-1893 and 27-5-1893. 
58 
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI 
any disrespect to the Court. Just as it is a mark of respect 
amongst the Europeans to take off their hats, in like manner it is 
in Indians to retain one's head-dress. 
To appear uncovered 
before a gentleman is not to respect him. In England, on attend-
ing drawing-room meetings and evening parties, Indians always 
keep the head-dress, and the English ladies and gentlemen gene-
rally seem to appreciate the regard which we show thereby. In 
High Courts in India those Indian advocates who have not dis-
carded their native head-dress invariably keep it on. 
As to bowing, or salaaming as you would call it, I again 
followed the rule observed in the Bombay High Court. If an 
advocate enters the Court after the judge has taken his seat 
on the bench he does not bow, but all the advocates rise up when 
the judge enters the Court, and keep standing until the judge 
has taken his seat. 
Accordingly, yesterday when His Worship 
entered the Court I rose up, and only took my seat after His 
Worship had done so. 
The paragraph seems to convey also that though I was told 
privately not to keep my seat at the horseshoe, I nevertheless 
"returned to the horseshoe". 
The truth is that I was taken 
by the chief clerk to the interpreters' room, and was asked not 
to take my seat at the horseshoe the next time I came unless 
I produced my credentials. To make assurance doubly sure I ask-
ed the chief clerk if I could retain my seat for the day, and he 
very kindly said "yes". 
I was therefore really surprised to be 
told again in open court that in order to be entitled to the 
seat I had to produce credentials, etc. 
Lastly, I beg His Worship's pardon if he was offended at 
what he considered to be my rudeness, which was the result of 
ignorance and quite unintentional. 
I hope, in fairness, you will extend me the favour of finding 
the above explanation a space in your paper, as the paragraph, 
if unexplained, would be likely to do me harm. 
I am, etc., 
M. 
K. GANDHI 
The Natal Advertiser, 29-5-1893 
