27. LETTER TO "THE NATAL ADVERTISER" 
PRETORIA, 
September 19, 1893 
TO 
THE EDITOR 
The Natal Advertiser 
SIR, 
I shall be very thankful to you if you would be good enough 
to find place for the following in your paper: 
Mr. Pillay, who recently wrote to The Transvaal Advertiser, 
has been taken to pieces for being "nasty" by some gentlemen here 
and by the papers there. I wonder if your leader about "the wily 
wretched Asiatic traders", "the real canker that is eating into the 
very vitals of the community", "these parasites who live a semi-
barbaric life" would not bear Mr. Pillay's letter out of the field 
in a hard-word competition. However, tastes differ as to style, and 
I have no right to sit in judgment upon anyone's style of writing. 
But why all this outpouring of wrath on the poor Asiatic 
traders? It is difficult to see how the Colony is in danger of literal 
1 Pillay's complaint was that he was violently pushed off the footpath. 
2 Administrative capital of the Union; 511 miles from Durban 
60 
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI 
ruination. The reasons, so far as I can gather from your lead-
ing article of the 15th instant, can be summed up in the follow-
ing words: "One Asiatic has gone into insolvency, and paid 5d. 
in the £. This is a fair sample of an Asiatic trader. 
He has driven 
out the small European trader." 
Now, granting that a majority of Asiatic traders do become 
insolvent, and pay very little to their creditors (which is not at all 
the case), is that a good reason for driving them out of the Colony 
or South Africa? Does it not rather show that there must be a 
defect in the Insolvency Law that they can thus ruin their credi-
tors? If the law would give any latitude for such practices, people 
would take advantage of it. Do not the Europeans seek the pro-
tection of the Insolvency Court? I do not, of course, mean to 
defend the Indian traders by this tu quoque argument. I sincerely 
regret that the Indians should resort to such practices at all. It 
is a disgrace to their country, which one time had too great an 
idea of its honour to be associated with any dishonest dealing in 
trade. But it certainly seems to me that a case is not made out 
for expelling the Indian traders on the strength of the fact of their 
availing themselves of the law of bankruptcy. 
Not only can the 
law put a stop to the frequent occurrence of such cases, but the 
wholesale merchants, too, by being a little more careful, can 
do so. And, by the way, does not the very fact that these traders 
do get credit from the European merchants show that they are 
not, after all, so bad as they are portrayed by you? 
If the small European trader has been driven out, is it to be 
laid at their door ? This shows, it would appear, a greater compe-
tency on the part of the Indian trader in commerce, and this 
very superior competency is to be a reason for his expulsion! I 
ask you, sir, is this fair? If one editor edited his paper more ably 
than his rival, and consequently, drives the latter out of the 
field, how would the former like to be told that he should give place 
to his crest-fallen rival because he (the successful one) was able? 
Should not the superior ability be a special reason for encourage-
ment so that the rest may try to rise as high? 
Is it a sound policy 
to stifle healthy competition? Should not the European trader take 
a leaf out of the book of the Indian trader, if that be not below 
his dignity, and learn how to trade cheaply, how to live simply? 
"Do unto others as you would be done by." 
But you say these wretched Asiatics live a 
semi-barbaric 
life. It would be highly interesting to learn your views of a semi-
barbaric life. I have some notion of the life they live. If a room 
without a nice, rich carpet and ornamental hangings, a dinner 
LETTER TO "THE NATAL ADVERTISER" 
61 
table (perhaps unvarnished), without an expensive table-cloth, 
with no flowers to decorate it, with no wines spread, no pork or 
beef ad lib, be a semi-barbaric life; if a white comfortable dress, 
specially adapted to a warm climate, which, I am told, many 
Europeans envy them in the trying heat of summer, be a semi-
barbaric life; if no beer, no tobacco, no ornamental walking stick, 
no golden watch chain, no luxuriously-fitted sitting-room, be a 
semi-barbaric life; if, in short, what one commonly understands 
by a simple frugal life be a semi-barbaric life, then, indeed, the 
Indian traders must plead guilty to the charge, and the sooner 
the semi-barbarity is wiped out from the highest Colonial civiliza-
tion, the better. 
The elements that generally constitute a reason for expulsion 
of a people from civilized States are entirely absent in the case 
of these people. You will agree when I say that they are not a 
political danger to the Government, since they meddle very 
little, if at all, in politics. They are not notorious robbers. I believe 
there is not a single case of an Indian trader having suffered im-
prisonment, or even been charged with theft, robbery, or any of 
the heinous crimes. (I speak under correction.) Their teetotal habits 
make them exceptionally peaceful citizens. 
But they spend nothing, says the leading article under dis-
cussion. Don't they? I suppose they live on air or sentiments. We 
know that Becky lived on nothing a year in Vanity Fair. And 
here a whole class seems to have been found out doing the 
same. It is to be presumed they have to pay nothing for shop-
rents, taxes, butchers' bills, grocers' bills, clerks' salaries, etc. etc. 
One would, indeed, like to belong to such a blessed class of tra-
ders, especially in the present critical condition of the trade all the 
world over. 
It seems, on the whole, that their simplicity, their total absti-
nence from intoxicants, their peaceful and, above all, their busi-
nesslike and frugal habits, which should serve as a recommenda-
tion, are really at the bottom of all this contempt and hatred of 
the poor Indian traders. And they are British subjects. Is this 
Christian-like, is this fair play, is this justice, is this civilization? 
I pause for a reply. 
Thanking you in anticipation for inserting this. 
I am, etc., 
M. 
K. 
GANDHI 
The Natal Advertiser, 23-9-1893 
