29. 
LETTER TO "THE NATAL ADVERTISER" 
PRETORIA, 
September 29, 1893 
TO 
THE EDITOR 
The Natal Advertiser 
SIR, 
I have to request your indulgence for inserting the fol-
lowing in your paper: 
To make an exhaustive reply to the programme set forth 
by you for the would-be anti-Asiatic league in your issue of the 
19th inst. is a Herculean task, and it cannot be undertaken in the 
compass of a letter to a newspaper. I would, however, with your 
permission, take up only two items, viz., the fears about "the 
coolie vote swamping the European vote", and the supposed un-
fitness of the Indians to vote. 
At the outset, I would appeal to your good sense, and the 
love of fair play which is supposed to be a characteristic of the 
British nation. No amount of facts or arguments would convince 
you or your readers of the justness of my remarks if you or they 
are resolved upon looking at one side only of the question. 
Cool judgment and a dispassionate and impartial enquiry are es-
sential to a right view of the whole matter. 
Does it not appear a far-fetched view that the Indian vote can 
ever swamp the European vote? 
A mere superficial observer can 
see that such a thing can never happen. A sufficient number can 
never command the property qualifications to be able to outdo 
the European vote. 
They are divided into two classes—the traders and the labou-
rers. The latter are by far in the majority, and have no votes as a 
rule. Poverty-stricken, they come to Natal on starvation wages. 
Can they ever dream of having enough property to qualify them-
selves for voting? 
And these are they who live here with any 
degree of permanence. Some only of the former class have the 
property qualifications; but then they do not live permanently in 
Natal, and many of those who can legally vote would never care 
to do so. The Indians as a class never, even in their own coun-
try, avail themselves of all their political rights. They are too much 
taken up with their spiritual well-being to think of taking an 
64 
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI 
active part in politics. They have no very great political aspira-
tions. 
They come not to be politicians, but to earn an honest 
bread, and it is a matter for regret if some do not earn it strictly 
honestly. So, then, it seems that all the fears about the Indian vote 
assuming portentous proportions are ill-grounded. 
And even the few votes that the Indians command cannot 
in any way affect Natal politics. 
All talk about an Indian party 
clamouring for Indian representation seems to be chimerical, for 
the selection would always be between two White men. Would 
it, then, matter much that there are some Indian votes? 
The 
most the few votes can do will be to secure them a perfectly 
White gentleman, who would, if he is faithful to his promise, do 
them good service in the Assembly. And fancy one or two such 
members making up an Indian party! Why, they, or rather he, 
would be a veritable John1 crying in the wilderness without his 
electric, and perhaps I should say divine, power of converting. 
Even strong little parties representing diverse minor interests can 
effect very little in the Imperial Parliament. They can only heckle 
the First Lord with a few questions, and have the satisfaction 
of seeing their names appear in the next morning's papers. 
Then, you think that they (the Indians) are not civilized 
enough to be fit for voting; that they may not be any better 
than the Natives; and that they are certainly not equal to the 
Europeans in the scale of civilization. Perhaps not. And all would 
depend upon the meaning of the word "civilization". It is impos-
sible to enter into a full discussion of all the questions suggested 
by an enquiry into the matter. I may, however, be allowed to 
point out that they enjoy these privileges in India. 
The Queen's 
Proclamation of 1858—which is justly and rightly called the 
Magna Charta of the Indians—runs: 
We hold ourselves bound to the natives of our Indian territories 
by the same obligations of duty which bind us to all our other sub-
jects, and these obligations, by the blessing of Almighty God, we shall 
faithfully and conscientiously fulfil. 
It is our further will that, so far 
as may be, our subjects, of whatever race or creed, be freely and im-
partially admitted to offices in our service, the duties of which they may 
be qualified by their education, ability, and integrity, duly to discharge. 
I can produce other similar extracts relating to the Indians. 
But I am afraid I have already trespassed too much upon your 
courtesy. 
I may add, however, that an Indian has been the 
acting Chief Justice of the High Court of Calcutta; an Indian 
1 The reference is to John the Baptist. 
WORK FOR VEGETARIANISM 
65 
is a judge of the High Court at Allahabad, whose co-religionists the 
Indian traders as a rule are; and an Indian is a member of the 
British Parliament. Moreover, the British Government in many 
respects follow in the footsteps of Akbar the Great, who ruled and 
lived in the 16th century. He was an Indian. The present land 
system is a copy of the policy of Todurmull, the great financier 
and an Indian, with but few modifications. If all this is the out-
come, not of civilization, but of semi-barbarity, I have yet to learn 
what civilization means. 
If, in the face of all the above facts, you can foment dis-
sensions, and set the European section of the community to work 
against the Indian section, you are great. 
I am, etc., 
M. K. GANDHI 
The Natal Advertiser, 3-10-1893 
