31. 
GUIDE TO LONDON 
[1893-94] 1 
INTRODUCTION 
In these days of cheap publication authors are constantly 
multiplying and have naturally lost a great deal of the respect 
they used to command before. Let me then at once inform the 
reader 
that, 
in 
issuing 
this little guide I am not aspiring to 
authorship, but simply supplying, as I believe, a long-felt want. Is-
suing guides does not make authors. They are made of 'sterner 
stuff'. 
It will be readily admitted that, though Indians have been 
going to and returning from England for the last twenty years 
and more, no attempt has yet been made at writing a guide like 
this. Some of them have published books describing with much 
effect what is to be seen in England and elsewhere. But they 
have not gone further. They leave you in suspense, for they do 
create in you a desire for going to England, but how to do it 
they seem to have failed to tell. 
Scores of Indians have become 
barristers, yet no one has made bold to inform his countrymen 
how he managed to live in England. While there I received many 
1 The exact date of writing is not available. 
Pyarelal says: "Comparative 
leisure at Pretoria enabled Gandhiji to resume two little unfinished ventures 
on which he had launched while he was in India. 
One was a little hand-
book or Guide to London that he had set about to prepare in answer to numer-
ous inquiries on his return from London. . . . It bears the evidence of having 
been written, at least in part, between the second half of 1893 and the first 
half of 1894... He never published it." (The Early Phase, p. 316). 
In the introduction, Gandhiji writes: "And here the only topic of con-
versation with my visitors has been England till I have been sometimes literally 
bored (p. 67)." "Here" in this sentence appears to refer to India. 
It is not 
known whether the introduction was written before or after the text, but it may 
be presumed that the work was commenced before Gandhiji left for South 
Africa in 1893. 
Gandhiji mentions the "morning coat ... now five years 
old", which he must have bought on reaching London in September 1888; 
vide pp. 76-7. 
About the circumstances in which the MS was located, Pyarelal writes: 
"The existing copy was retrieved by me from a heap of papers littering the 
floor of the weaving shed in the Satyagraha Ashram at Sabarmati, shortly 
after my arrival there in 1920. 
It being shown to Gandhiji, he said that it 
had been made at his instance by one of his clerks in South Africa, who wrote 
a very bad hand, to improve his handwriting. 
Unfortunately some pages 
in the appendix are missing. 
The original could never be traced" (E.P.). 
GUIDE TO LONDON 
67 
letters from friends asking me to throw some light on one thing 
or another. And here the only topic of conversation with my visi-
tors has been England till I have been sometimes literally bored. 
The avidity with which they have devoured the information must 
by itself justify the publication of this unpretentious guide. 
No doubt there are many reasons why a book like this has 
not been before the public long ago. Any such book in order to 
be exhaustive must 
necessarily contain important 
revelations 
which I know painfully would perhaps stir up a useless controversy 
and wrangle and which some would always like not to be made 
at all. The movements alike of students and laymen in England 
are shrouded in mystery. No one for instance knows definitely 
what an Indian eats in England, where he lives; whether he cooks 
his food or not, etc., etc. Now these are the very points which 
are of vital importance to those who intend to go to England. 
The writer, therefore, of the following pages proposes to discover 
the mystery and lay bare the movements of Indians in England. 
Such a course, I hope, would facilitate to some extent the way 
to England in addition to helping the people to understand the 
England-returned Indians, but I am afraid it will bring on me 
showers of reproaches and remonstrances from many persons. It 
may even cost me friendships. Some would call me rash, others 
would be content with saying that I lack tact1, while yet others 
would fling youth into my face, but I have resolved upon bearing 
the storm for the sake of truth. 
The next question is whether I am the person who should 
write such a book. I am inclined to leave it to the reader to a 
great extent to answer the question. I know there are persons 
who would tell the same story in a nobler language, who would 
tell it with a greater accuracy, who would tell with a greater ful-
ness and I know also that probably no one can combine in him-
self all the qualities. The only reason why I write the book is that 
no one has as yet written it though badly wanted. As a rule the 
book will contain facts only and at times personal observations 
when absolutely necessary. 
If, 
at any 
time, 
anyone finds 
anything that he cannot understand or any error in the book, I 
shall thank him to correspond with me so that I may offer an 
explanation or correct the error. 
Before concluding the introduction, I beg [all to] extend me 
their co-operation, i.e., help me by buying and, what is more 
necessary, reading the book so that they may help themselves. 
1 The source has 'tactics'. 
68 
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI 
Facts which can be determined easily from other sources 
will not generally find place in this guide, but the sources will be 
referred to. The province of the book is not to collect information 
from the existing books, but to attempt that which has not yet 
been attempted. 
CHAPTER I 
WHO SHOULD GO TO ENGLAND? 
It may be laid down broadly that all who can afford should 
go to England. Of course, here the meaning of the word 'afford' 
should be understood in its widest sense. Thus some cannot go 
to England because they cannot afford the money, some cannot 
afford through ill-health, others cannot owing to young age and 
various other objections. All these will be briefly discussed in the 
following paragraphs. 
The first and the foremost question is the question of health. 
No one with a weak chest or a tendency to consumption should 
ever think of going to England. It will simply mean going to Eng-
land in order to court death away from friends and relations. It is 
true that you can go to the south of Europe not only without 
injury to the constitution but with benefit to it; thus you can go to 
the Riviera and be cured of consumption. Thousands of con-
sumptive persons annually flock there to be cured of the fell 
disease. It is supposed to be one of the finest places for persons 
with weak chests; but all this means a great outlay of money. And 
then again the book is not written for invalids so that they may 
get cured by following the instructions therein contained. It is 
written for those with a good health who want to learn and be 
useful. Moreover it is for those who would go to England. 
It 
is true also that a person with a generally weak health might take 
a trip to England during the summer season without coming to 
much or any harm. Still, if I can venture to give an opinion, I 
should say that those with any chest disease whatever should never 
think of going to England except under special circumstances and 
conditions. On the other hand, persons suffering from any disease 
due to a warm climate can do worse than going to England. I 
used to suffer from headaches and nose-bleeding in India. 
I 
could not read for three or four hours at a stretch during the 
summer months without getting a headache. 
Now I am happy 
to say I am entirely free from both and this I ascribe mainly to 
the cold and invigorating climate of England. On the question 
of health if there be any doubt about it, it would be best always 
to consult some medical authority. 
GUIDE TO LONDON 
69 
The next question is as to age. It is very difficult to lay down 
any hard and fast rules for that. All parents must generally know 
when they can part with their children. The solution of the ques-
tion depends moreover on the character of the boy who wants 
to go. Then again it depends on what he wants to do there. If 
he wants to pass the Civil Service examination, the limit of age 
is now 23. For a person desiring to be a barrister, he must be 
twenty-one years before he is called. He who wants to matri-
culate must be at least sixteen years old. If you want to give 
your child a beginner's education, you can send it without a 
guardian to one of the many homes, where children only are 
educated and taken care of. 
Having so far dealt with the negative side, I come to the 
positive. To lay down broadly that all those who have money, 
a good constitution and [are] of proper age should go to England 
seems very tempting, but it is not sufficient. All such persons may 
inquire "Why should we go to England?" And I venture to answer: 
for the purposes of trade, travel or education. Nowadays many go 
there for education, some go there for travelling, but very few 
for trade, though the last is the most important for the material 
well-being of the country. Everyone knows that India wants trade 
more than anything else and that England is the best place for 
getting an insight into different trades. I do not for a moment 
hold that a person can learn trading only in England. What he 
does learn is the trading habits of the people. If he wants to ex-
tend his commerce with England, the more he knows the land 
and their people the better for him. 
From this it follows that he 
should go to England specially for that. 
Those who go there 
for the sake of education or travel do not and cannot make it 
their object to study everything relating to trade. There one sees 
different branches of commerce in a most efficient state. He sees 
also how the large establishments are carried on. A fellow with 
a trading knowledge can know what would be the best things to 
trade in. Then again, if we had a direct communication with Eng-
lish gentlemen, we can dispense with agency. I know there are 
some Indians who have established themselves in England and are 
trading there. This is very good so far as it goes, but it does 
not go far enough. I am sorry to say that the management of 
these houses is far from satisfactory and consequently they are 
not doing a swinging business. 
I should like educated traders 
who have a good knowledge of English to go there, mix with the 
people, see the secret of their success and then return to India, 
open up branches in England and India in an improved style. I 
70 
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI 
have been told that we stand a fair chance of doing a good 
business in selling carved wood and stones and feathers in Eng-
land. 
Everyone 
knows 
how many feathers are daily wasted 
away in almost every part of India. Since they are a salable 
commodity in Europe, we are wasting away real wealth simply 
through sheer ignorance or indifference. These are mere instances. 
There must be various other things which would sell in Eng-
land. It is exactly because we do not know these things that 
we should go to England to learn what they are. Will a time 
come when every trading firm will send their man to England? 
Then as to travelling. 
Both the traders and students can combine a little travelling 
with their profession. These are travellers of a low type. Those 
who want to become professional travellers, who want to write 
books on travels must go there for the special purpose of travelling. 
But I believe such persons had better see their own country first. 
I cannot do better than quote Mr. Malabari on the point: 
In study as in travel it is best to begin at the very beginning and 
to proceed by slow stages, gaining something at every stage and that 
something such as to be of immediate practical use at the next stage. 
When you travel or study by degrees, every fresh step or item of know-
ledge is a keen enjoyment. You are prepared to receive it, and, thus 
received, your knowledge will fructify. 
But when knowledge is thrust 
upon you without previous discipline, i.e., without your being fit for it, 
it will be inert and unleavened. 
What is the use of visiting foreign count-
ries when you know nothing of your own? 
When you go to Europe 
ignorant of your own national life, you will miss those thousand points 
of comparison and contrast, those thousand shades of difference, those 
thousand beauties and blemishes that modern European civilization pre-
sents. 
At the best you will look at things, not see or see through them. 
These are wise words worthy of serious consideration. The 
outcome of it is that you should begin not at the wrong end. 
Last of all comes education. It is with very much regret that 
I have to record here that almost all who go to England for the 
purposes of education go there in order to become barristers. 
Education does not mean becoming barristers. I shall have a good 
deal to say about barristers in a separate chapter, so here I 
shall just say what other things you can do there. Of course the 
most coveted examination is the Civil Service examination. But 
those only who are British-born subjects can go in for that exa-
mination. Engineering is another branch of education which you 
can learn at the Cooper's Hill College. 
You can get the highest 
GUIDE TO LONDON 
71 
medical degree at the London University. 
It has turned out 
most eminent doctors, but it is a long course and, though theo-
retically requiring only five years, requires practically seven years. 
Oxford and Cambridge Universities impart a very good education. 
They are meant for the richer classes, not the poor. The educa-
tion received in these universities is quite different from that receiv-
ed in the Indian universities. They are not so exacting as our 
universities here. Again, in India generally it is all work which, as 
is said, "with no play makes Jack a dull boy". 
The Oxford and 
Cambridge education combines both work and play. 
That uni-
versity life is not a drudgery as I suppose, unfortunately, it is here. 
It would be impossible to give exhaustive information about 
the various centres of education. They can only be pointed out. 
The secretaries of all these institutions can be written to and will 
send prospectuses wherefrom every detailed information can be 
gathered. Edinburgh too is a place which has become a favourite 
place with the Indians, mostly medical students. The medical course 
there is far easier than the London course which, of course, is the 
hardest. 
The Durham University, too, gives a medical diploma. 
It might be urged that all these things can be had here and 
at a less cost. 
I would admit the former though not the latter. 
However, the mere fact that the same thing can be had in India is 
not sufficient. The question is which is of superior quality. Is not 
education in any branch far superior in England to that in India? 
Cannot a man learn more during the same time in England than 
in India? The last proposition is self-evident. 
A student here is 
half student and half man. He may be married too. In that case, 
he has to think of his wife, perhaps children, in addition to house-
hold cares which an Indian student is generally saddled with. 
While, in England, he is alone, no wife to tease or flatter him, 
no parents to indulge, no children to look after, no company to 
disturb. He is the master of his time. So, if he has the will, he 
can do more. Moreover, the invigorating climate in England is 
by itself a stimulant to work, the enervating climate of India is a 
stimulant to idleness. 
Who has not passed idle hours in a 
summer noon? 
Who has not wished he had nothing to do in 
summer but to sleep? 
Of course, persons there are who never 
cease to work in India. In fact, hardest working students are 
found in India. But that work is against the will. In England, it 
does not do to be idle. You like the work for the sake of it. You 
cannot help working. 
I have heard it said of a very learned 
professor that he read as much in three years in England as he 
would have in nine years in India. 
That amount of work which 
72 
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI 
tells upon one's health in India can be gone through with ease 
in England. An instance is at our very doors. Do we not work more 
in winter than in summer? 
So, then, it will not be doubted that 
a person willing to work will do more in England than in India. 
It is needless to mention the advantage that we have in England of 
talking in the English language the whole of our time. It is fer-
vently to be hoped that examples of persons having cut a sorry 
figure will not be cited in refutation of the above proposition. For 
such fall under the category of these who are not willing to work, 
while we are here talking of persons who seek more opportunities 
for work in England than in India. 
It will be very unchari-
table to expect drones to return types of learning from England. 
There are the better opportunities, it is for you to avail of them. 
If you do not, you are to blame, not England. And if superior 
education can be obtained in England, it follows that it is not 
more expensive than that to be obtained in India, if the ratio 
of superiority be the same as that of increased expenses. 
CHAPTER II 
PRELIMINARIES 
Having in the previous chapter shown who should go to Eng-
land, I now proceed to describe what preliminaries one has to make 
before starting. In so doing if I may at times enter into the most 
trifling details, I hope the reader will not take it as an insult. The 
standard by which I go is my intelligence and lower still if pos-
sible and I shall describe things which required an explanation 
in my case when I left for England. 
The first consideration is that of money. 
The amount of 
money the candidate has to take with him will be given later on, 
but whatever the amount, let him make absolutely sure of getting 
the full amount in England. 
In certain cases it may be advi-
sable to take the whole amount with him. 
I know by personal 
experience how even persons who have promised on oath to give 
some pecuniary assistance, a loan mind you, not an absolute 
gift and whom you think [you] can safely depend upon prove 
false to their promises.1 In London you do not often find per-
sons who would give you a loan even. 
The loan too is gene-
rally big, for when you do not get the promised money, it is not 
a small sum, but a tolerably large one which you would not expect 
any friend to lend. I know by personal experience and that of 
1 Vide An 
Autobiography, Pt. I, Ch. XIII; also "Draft of Letter to 
Frederick Lely", December 1888. 
GUIDE TO LONDON 
73 
friends what it is for an Indian to be without money even for a 
moment in England. 
It involves an extra expense of wiring 
home, not to speak of the anxieties one has to suffer under such 
circumstances, and wiring to India is very expensive. It is four 
shillings per word. Therefore be sure you will get a sufficient 
amount of money and that, too, at the proper time. 
Then, if possible, it is always advisable to get some introduc-
tion notes to gentlemen in England. They are not absolutely 
necessary, but when you can get them, they are not useless. You 
know that you will have some friends when you reach there. They 
are a consolation and, 
at times, friendships built upon such 
introduction notes become lasting and genuine.1 
Now you have to consider what things to take with you, where 
to buy the passage and where to put up on reaching London. 
I shall first give a list of necessary things and then offer a 
few remarks thereon, when deemed necessary. 
Rs. As. 
1 
Overcoat 
30 
0 
1 
Morning coat 
20 
0 
1 Waistcoat 
10 
0 
1 Jacket suit (vest jacket) 
30 
0 
3 
Pairs of trousers 
27 0 
3 
" 
drawers (woollen) 
15 
0 
3 
" 
" 
(cotton or merino) 
6 
0 
3 
Woollen vests 
12 0 
3 
Cotton or merino vests 
4 
0 
3 Woollen shirts without collars 
16 
0 
6 
Woollen shirts with collars 
18 
0 
1 
White shirt 
2 0 
1 Pair of braces 
1 8 
3 
Standup collars 
1 0 
Mother-of-pearl studs 
0 
8 
" 
links 
0 
4 
12 
Handkerchiefs 
1 4 
2 Sleeping suits (woollen) 
15 
0 
1 Pair of gloves 
2 0 
1 Rug 
10 
0 
6 
Cotton or merino socks 
3 0 
3 Woollen socks 
4 
0 
———
228 
8 
1 Vide An Autobiography, Pt. I, Ch. XIII. 
74 
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI 
Rs. As. 
B.F. 
228 
8 
1 Rugstrap 
1 
8 
1 Pair of slippers 
1 4 
1 Pair of shoes 
4 
0 
1 
,, 
boots 
6 
0 
1 Turkish cap 
1 
4 
1 
Cloth brush 
1 0 
1 Hair brush 
1 
0 
1 Tooth brush 
0 
4 
1 
Shaving brush 
1 
0 
1 Razor 
2 0 
1 Razor strap 
2 0 
1 Comb 
0 
8 
1 Shaving stick 
1 0 
Tongue scraper 
0 
4 
Note paper 
0 
8 
Envelopes to match 
0 
4 
Travelling inkstand 
0 
8 
Penholder and pocket pencil 
0 
8 
Blotting 
0 
4 
Pins and needles and thread 
0 
4 
Penknife 
1 
8 
Pens 
0 
8 
Money purse 
0 
8 
Stick 
1 
0 
Deck chair 
5 
0 
Two trunks 
16 
0 
Some books 
Umbrella 
4 
0 
——— 
Total 
Rs. 
282 
4 
To buy the above things care must be taken that the best 
things are bought at the cheapest prices and that the things bought 
are suitable.  . . .  There are many shops in Bombay. Some of the 
native shops are very good. The English shops would be found 
to be very expensive. Whenever practicable, it is always best to 
get some experienced person to buy the things for you. 
It may not be useless here to make a few remarks on the above 
list. Two trunks have been mentioned in the list and the price 
for both has been put down at Rs. 16/-. Each trunk may be 
26 x 12¹. 
Generally they buy one steel trunk and a leather 
1 Obviously inches 
GUIDE TO LONDON 
75 
bag. And one of the best steel trunks would cost Rs. 25 and a 
leather bag—a gladstone bag—would cost much the same. 
This 
expense is not necessary. A good trunk can be bought for Rs. 12. 
In putting down the price at Rs. 16 I have in my mind native 
iron trunks which are as strong as, if not stronger than, the steel 
trunks. That would be an encouragement to native industry and 
a saving of a few rupees to the purchaser. If the native trunks do 
not suit or if they cannot be had, wooden boxes can be bought 
or imitation steel trunks which do not cost more than Rs. 5 each. 
The P. & O. rules say with regard to the size of the trunks: 
The portmanteau for cabin use should not exceed 3 ft in length, 
1 ft 9 inches in width and 1 ft and 3 inches in depth. No packages exceed-
ing this limit are allowed in the saloons or cabins. 
The prices for other articles are not by any means the lowest 
prices. For example, while I have put down ½ rupee for a pair 
of socks, a good pair can be had for 5 or 6 annas. If good wool-
len socks cannot be had in Bombay, they may be bought in 
London. For six socks would answer the purpose in the boat. With 
the clothing mentioned in the above list one need not spend any-
thing on dress for a year in England. A further list of clothing 
will be given later on. It may be bought in England if it is found 
necessary. And that would give one more than enough clothing 
for a 3 years' stay in England. 
Certain things that are generally included in such lists have 
been purposely left out, e.g., towels, soap, etc. These things can 
be had gratis on board. Foreign stamps can be bought on board. 
As to what dress to wear on board, it is best to begin with 
the jacket suit. It is not at all necessary to wear the undervest 
or the drawers. They should be made use of only when the cold 
weather has begun. It is always advisable not to overload oneself 
with dress. I have come across many persons who have suffered 
from over-clothing. Of course, it is equally necessary not to 
underclothe. The undervest and drawers would not be required 
till the steamer reaches Port Said, for, the weather to be met 
with from Bombay to Port Said is not less warm than that we 
experience in India. If cold is felt after leaving Port Said, the cotton 
underclothing may be worn or, if necessary, the woollen under-
clothing. Till Brindisi is reached the overcoat may not be touched 
at all. It must be understood that this is not the condition in 
which all can live. No hard and fast rules can be laid down for 
clothing. The above remarks have been made simply to remove 
the generally prevalent idea that the under-clothing and the over-
76 
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI 
coat are absolutely necessary as soon as the steamer leaves the 
harbour. The safest thing to do is to begin to wear more and 
warmer clothes according to necessity. 
The white shirts have almost been left out. This may be consi-
dered a hardship not because they are a climatic necessary but 
because they are a fashion. Well, this is a book meant for those 
who want to live cheaply and yet respectably. One can safely break 
through fashion especially when it is expensive and injurious, but 
the process should not be gone through violently. 
The white 
shirts have been left out because they swell up the weekly washing 
bill to a very great extent. A white shirt would cost 4d to wash 
while a flannel shirt would cost only 2d. 
Again, while one flannel 
shirt per week is sufficient, at least two white shirts would hardly 
answer the purpose. 
They spoil sooner than the flannel shirts. 
Indeed, some unconventional gentlemen in England who have 
ceased adoring the fashion as a goddess have discarded stiff 
clothing altogether. They have bidden goodbye to the stiff collars, 
cuffs and the shirts. 
Even medical opinion has begun to revolt 
against too much use of starch which is absolutely necessary for 
washing white shirts. 
The starch has been pronounced to be 
injurious to the body. Whatever it is, there is no denying the fact 
that flannel shirts are more comfortable and, in the end, less 
expensive than linen shirts. 
However, if the fashion is to be adored as it ought to be 
more or less, if you are not to break through it violently, 
wear the flannel shirts without collars; use the white collars and 
cuffs and you would lead others to believe that you have white 
shirts on. This trick is resorted to by thousands in London and 
sometimes it is very convenient. And, if at times, you like to 
look a London swell, that too has been provided for. 
A white 
shirt would be found mentioned in the list and may be used occa-
sionally. 
As a token of respect to the fashion goddess, the neck-ties too 
have not been forgotten. They will find a place in the further 
list. They might be used or not according to one's fancies. They 
do not cost much if bought cheaply. 
The morning coat is worn on visits. On board, too, if you are 
a first-saloon passenger, 
it is a necessity. 
As far as possible, 
you should wear the jacket suit so that the morning coat may 
not be spoiled. The writer of these pages had only one morning 
coat. It is now five years old and yet looks as new as if it were 
made yesterday. As soon as it is done with, brush it well, fold it 
and put it in your chest of drawers and it would never spoil. 
GUIDE TO LONDON 
77 
Shaving materials are mentioned in the list. Do not be sur-
prised. You shall not be a professional barber. But you will have 
to shave yourself if you have a beard. 
Even kings are not 
ashamed of so doing in Europe. If you have thick hair, you have 
to shave every day. It is a trouble to be at the mercy of a barber 
every day and incur an expense of at least 2d. 
To save that 
it is necessary to learn how to shave oneself. 
It does not take 
long. Only a few minutes spent for three or four days would be 
found sufficient. 
For head-dress the turkish cap is mentioned. This is very 
handy. But, for one who feels uncomfortable in the cap and does 
not like to be noticed by people, a felt-hat is mentioned in the 
second list that is to follow. 
For tooth powder the best (medically) and yet the cheapest 
powder is precipitated chalk. 
You can get 4 oz. for 6d. 
This 
will last for months. 
Slippers are to be worn at home and on board only. 
There is another item of dress that has been left out from 
the list. It is the dress suit. Now this is not at all necessary. 
Although many Indians buy it, it is not advisable to incur that 
expense. I bought it myself and am very sorry for it. I wore it 
but three or four times. 
I consider that to be the most foolish 
expense I incurred in England. They wear it for evening parties. 
We Indians can wear the morning coat or the Parsee coat or our 
own native dress whatever that may be. 
I have seen many 
Indians wearing the morning coat. 
There is nothing wrong in 
it. You have to look clean and tidy, nothing more. 
A watch has not been mentioned in the list. For, it has become 
an article of everyday wear among the educated Indians. 
The second list will be found in the 4th chapter. The arti-
cles contained in it are to be bought in England. No one should 
go beyond the list unless he uses his clothes very carelessly and, 
if one goes to England to become or remain careless, might it 
not be said, he had better not go at all. The two lists include 
more than ordinarily required clothing for an ordinarily careful 
man for three years. 
The next thing that one has to do is to buy the passage. 
Three things are to be considered before buying it, viz.: 
1. 
What month to start in. 
2. 
Whether to go all the way by sea or via Brindisi. 
3. 
Whether to go by the P. & O. boats or any other 
Company's. 
78 
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI 
As to the first question, while one can start in any month, all 
things considered the middle of March is the best season. There-
by one avoids immediate experience of English winter and, before 
he meets with the bitter cold, he will have six beautiful months, 
viz., from April to September. April is the depth of spring and 
September the beginning of autumn. Ere he has the first expe-
rience of an English winter, he will have been acclimatized and ac-
customed to the English ways of living. 
He would thus be able 
to bear the winter with a greater equanimity. Moreover by start-
ing in March, one gets the mildest weather in the Red Sea. 
And even the mildest weather of the Red Sea is most trying. In 
summer, although only 3 days have to be spent on the Red 
Sea, it is unbearable. The heat is suffocating. 
No use of pun-
khas and ice is sufficient to allay the burning sensation. It is a 
time of perpetual perspiration. Moreover, in March the sea all 
the way is the calmest in the year. 
The next best time is September or October. By leaving at 
that time, of course, you have to brave the winter as soon as 
you reach England, but if you want to become a Barrister, 
you have this consolation that you would be able to return 
home three months earlier than by starting in any other month. 
This will be treated more 
fully in the chapter for would-be 
Barristers. 
Having selected the season, one has to consider what would 
be the best thing to do—whether to go all the way by sea or 
via Brindisi. It takes nearly 22 days by the P & O boats to 
reach London and 13 days to reach Brindisi, whence London is 
reached in 2 days by rail. 
It seems that it is much better to 
take the sea route throughout. 
Thereby all the inconveniences 
of removing luggage and having it examined, etc., are avoided and 
all the comforts to be found in P & O boats are enjoyed for a 
longer time. 
Moreover, a long voyage is very good for health. 
Some remain on the seas for months for the sake of health only. 
It is, therefore, advisable that one should take the sea voyage 
when especially it causes a saving of expense. The second-saloon 
fare to London by sea is Rs. 370, while via Brindisi it is more than 
Rs. 400. Those who get sea-sick very often need not be afraid of 
a sea voyage on that score. For during the 13 days for Brindisi one 
gets used to the sea and overcomes the sickness. It is to be hoped 
that no one would avoid the voyage from Brindisi for the reason 
that thereby he would be less open to the dangers of a wreck. 
This is an idea unworthy of one intending to go to England. It 
must be remembered that he would be one out of many in his 
GUIDE TO LONDON 
79 
steamer. 
There 
are dangers 
even on the railway. 
In fact, 
nowhere is life without dangers. 
It is a question merely of 
degree. 
The next question to be decided is what Company's boat 
to go by. There is a very wide field for selection. There the City, 
Hall, Clan, etc., steamers. But by far the best and most popular 
are the Peninsular and Oriental Company's boats, which carry 
Her Majesty's mails to London. 
The other lines are a trifle 
cheaper than the last 
mentioned and, if anyone chooses to 
book his passage on any of the above lines, he can see the mana-
ger and make arrangements. For there are no fixed rates for these 
lines. However, whenever practicable, P & O boats should be 
preferred. The passage can be booked through Messrs King and 
Co., or Messrs Thomas Cook & Sons at Bombay who are al-
ways obliging and ready to supply every information. They do 
not charge any commission. 
Whether to take the 1st-saloon or the 2nd-saloon ticket, very 
much depends upon one's purse. 
As to comforts, there is not 
much difference. 
Of course, a 1st-saloon passenger gets better 
company and better food. The food, however, given in the 2nd 
saloon is good enough. And, especially, a vegetarian should not 
incur the expenses of a 1st-saloon passage. 
The main difference 
is in food and, since a vegetarian would not take flesh meat, for 
him the 1st-saloon expense would be entirely unnecessary. The 
second saloon by sea costs Rs. 370, while the 1st saloon costs 
Rs. 680. A second-saloon passage via Brindisi including 2nd-class 
railway ticket costs Rs. 445 and a first-class railway ticket costs 
Rs. 500, while a first saloon with 1st-class railway ticket costs 
Rs. 810. 
First-saloon passengers are allowed on board 336 lb. of 
personal luggage free of freight and the second-saloon passengers 
168 lb. 
A few remarks about food, etc., on board would not be out of 
place here. For those who do not object to meat, nothing spe-
cially need be mentioned here except everything one can wish 
for can ordinarily be had on the steamer. The only complaint that 
can be urged against the Company in respect of food is that the 
passengers are over-fed. From morning till evening or, even as 
late as eleven o'clock, one can get something to eat at short inter-
vals. As early as six or seven o'clock, you get biscuits and tea or 
coffee. 
At 8.30 a.m. you get breakfast consisting of oatmeal 
porridge, jam, marmalade, bread, butter, salad, meat and pota-
toes ad libitum. 
At 1 p.m. you get a good dinner consisting of 
meat, potatoes and cabbage, some sweet, bread, butter, etc., and 
80 
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI 
twice in a week fruits and nuts. At 4 p.m. you can have a cup 
of tea and biscuits. Again at 6 p.m. a nice supper consisting of 
salad, cheese, bread, butter, jam, marmalade, tea, cocoa, etc., 
is provided and, as a finishing stroke, just at the time of going 
to bed, you can replenish the hungry stomach with biscuits and 
cheese. 
All this to an Indian would sound very strange and look 
like gluttony. A vegetarian must have found from the above that 
plenty of things can be had in the steamer that he can take. An 
Indian who has not been used to English dishes would, it is 
very likely, not relish the above dishes for some time. Though, 
after some time, he would find that all the dishes are very nice 
and nutritious. As a precaution, it would be better to keep a 
stock of some fresh fruits and sweets, e.g., jalebi, halva, etc., and 
some salt things, e.g., ganthia1, etc. 
These with English dishes 
now and then would quite suffice. Care should be taken that 
English dishes are increased and the quantity of native things 
taken decreased. Such a gradual change would be effected imper-
ceptibly and without affecting the constitution. 
The things to 
be found on board for a vegetarian are bread, butter, milk, 
fruit, nuts, jam, marmalade, rice, cheese, potatoes, cabbage, salad, 
cakes, tea, coffee, biscuits and porridge. This is really a large 
variety out of which many meals containing quite distinct articles 
can be made. Nothing can be more nutritious than porridge, 
bread and butter and a cup of cocoa or if you like tea. For 
dinner you can have one course of bread, butter and vegetables, 
another course of rice, milk and jam (a sweet preparation) and a 
third course of some fruit or bread and cheese. You can make a 
very good supper of bread, butter and cocoa and jam and salad 
or cheese or both. If these be not sufficient, special arrange-
ments are made for vegetarians. 
The chief steward should be in-
formed and requested to prepare some vegetable dishes and he 
very obligingly gets for you vegetable curry, fresh fruit and ste-
wed fruit and brown bread. And you cannot want anything 
more. Some interesting facts would be found from the appendix 
as to how the writer of these pages managed on board.2 If a pious 
Indian does not want to eat food cooked by Europeans, he can 
cook his own food in the Indian quarters, where they would give 
a space for cooking. Whether this is advisable or not is quite 
1 The source has this in Devnagari script; reference to a preparation 
made of gram flour. 
2 Vide also An Autobiography, Pt. I, Ch. XIII. 
GUIDE TO LONDON 
81 
another matter. This is mentioned just to remove the prevailing 
prejudice to the effect that on board one has no other course 
open but to take food cooked by the Europeans. 
The much-vexed and important question whether it is possible 
to remain a vegetarian on board and in England will be discussed 
in another chapter. It is sufficient to mention for the present pur-
poses that it is not at all necessary to take meat or wine and it is 
positively injurious to take the latter. 
Having landed in London, where to go seems to present 
some difficulty. The editor of The Vegetarian, a newspaper published 
in London Memorial Hall, Farringdon Street, has kindly con-
sented to give the necessary directions and find them the proper 
lodgings where they can have everything cheap and nice. Here I 
may be allowed to say a word about The Vegetarian. It is a paper 
which I believe should be subscribed to by every Indian who 
would see Englishmen as vegetarians and who would sympathize 
with the movement now going on in London. It should be 
bought not especially as mental food, not for the sake of the infor-
mation given by it, not for the high-class intellectual matter con-
tained in it, though these are by no means of an inferior quality, 
but for encouraging a movement every Indian should have at heart. 
To return, however, to the main subject, the people of the London 
Vegetarian Society are always kind and hospitable towards Indians 
and a more genial man than the editor of The Vegetarian it would 
be difficult to find. It would, therefore, be a great gain for every 
Indian going to England to let the editor know of his so doing. 
I may perhaps suggest, though the suggestion has nothing what-
ever to do with the editor, that in common fairness every such 
person would subscribe himself a member of the Society or sub-
scribe to the paper. 
But, if the above arrangement be not deemed feasible or ad-
visable, the next best thing to do would be put up at the Vege-
tarian Hotel, Charing Cross, be he a vegetarian or meat-eater. A 
list1 of houses would be found at the end of the book wherefrom 
to make a selection. The terms in the appendix places are very 
reasonable. Other hotels would be found very dear. On landing, 
a cab can always be had which would take you, on your giving 
the name, to the place named. These lodgings, it must be under-
stood, are only temporary until a permanent one is found. So the 
next thing to do would be to search for a good and suitable room. 
1 This is not available in Appendix A as some pages are missing. 
1-6 
82 
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI 
This can be done in the company of some friend whom you may 
be knowing or to whom you have got an introduction note. 
CHAPTER III 
THE COST OF LIVING 
This is the stumbling block. This is the question which is 
the most inviting and yet most repulsive. To enter into that ques-
tion seriously is to differ from everybody. Every man would fur-
nish his own estimates, thinking at the same time that no other 
estimates could be true and, if true, possible for everyone. That 
again is the question which is the most important, especially, to a 
man of ordinary circumstances. And it is strange that, although 
the question is admittedly of such a vast importance, greater igno-
rance does not prevail with regard to any question ordinarily pre-
senting itself to an Indian wishing to go to England than with 
regard to this. It is moreover true that the ordinary estimates 
quoted are from 10 to 20 pounds per month. 
Living on £10 per 
month was pronounced to be very economical. With such estimates 
to say that one can live comfortably on £4 a month or £1 a 
week could be a heresy. Nevertheless, it is a fact beyond doubt, as 
shall be proved just now, that it is possible to live on one pound 
a week and that many have lived on less. I may say that I have 
tried the experiment successfully and was never happier than under 
the £4 living. 
While I was living on £4 per month, I had to 
work the hardest. The reader will find from (App. A) how, from 
£12 per month, I gradually came down to £4 per month. 
First of all, I shall consider the cost of lodgings. It is common-
ly supposed that a student should have two rooms, one bed-room 
and one sitting-room. Now this is quite useless except to show, 
that you are very rich and can afford to spend any amount of 
money. This guide is not written for those who would make a show 
very often false, of their riches. It is written for those who would 
live a regular student's life, as economical as possible. There are 
many professional gentlemen-bachelors living in one room only. 
Of course, there are many Indian students and thousands of Eng-
lish students living in one room only. 
Two rooms are more for 
families than for students. Then if you have one room only with 
the necessary furniture in a good quarter, it can be had for 7s 
per week and less. 
Of course, one room can be had for 2s per 
week. I give low estimates. Such rooms can be had in North 
London, West, Central, West Kensington, Westbourne Park, and 
many other respectable parts of London commonly favoured by 
GUIDE TO LONDON 
83 
Indian students. In such a room you would find a table, three 
or four chairs, an easy chair, a wash-stand with all the requisites, 
a hearth, a chest of drawers, probably a book-case, cupboard, a 
carpet, a bedstead with bed-sheets and blankets, a looking-glass, 
etc. Are Indian students used to better-furnished rooms? Indeed, 
a raw Indian not used to the two rooms would be quite en-
chanted with such a room and would not wish for a better one. When 
I first saw my room in the Victoria Hotel, I thought I could pass a 
lifetime in that room. It is always best to find out a room in 
the neighbourhood of a place to be frequented most by you. 
Thereby a great deal of money required in travelling by bus 
or tram is saved. 
Secondly, as to other expenses, e.g., washing, bathing, etc. 
Your washerman's bill need not amount to more than 11 pence 
per week, which is as follows: 
d 
1 Flannel shirt 
2 
1 Drawers 
2 
1 Vest 
2 
2 Handkerchiefs 
1 
1 Sleeping suit 
4 
— 
Total 
11 d 
A saving can be effected in the above if you do not use the draw-
ers which you need not, in summer especially. The sleeping suits 
may be changed fortnightly. Moreover, with a little care, a good 
washerman can be found who would wash the drawers and suits 
for 1½ d each and sleeping suits for 3 d. If and when you wear 
the white shirts regularly for a week, instead of the flannel shirt, 
the washerman's bill would be heavier by 6 or 8d. But under no 
circumstances should it amount to more than 11d per week on 
an average. 
As to bathing, it is only in the newly-built houses that bath-
rooms are attached to them. In ordinary houses no bath-rooms 
can be found. In such cases very many visit the public baths 
weekly which cost 6d or 4d. 
But it is possible to have a daily 
bath without any expense wherever you go. You can take a sponge 
bath with two or three tumblers of hot water always to be sup-
plied at your request by the landlady in the morning. You can 
pour water into your basin, dip a sponge in it and rub hard with 
the sponge twice or thrice and then rub the body with a dry 
towel, and you have taken a very nice bath which gives a glow 
to the body and keeps it clean. Even the sponge may be left 
84 
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI 
out and the hands only used. To these daily baths may be added 
a fortnightly or monthly visit to the public baths. Your land-
lady supplies you with two towels every week. All these arrange-
ments must be made with the landlady before engaging a room 
so that no misunderstanding may arise in future. Whenever you 
go to engage a room, explain to the landlady what you want to 
have included in the weekly rent. Boot black, sheets, towels, ser-
vice, hot-water in the morning, etc., are generally included. 
It is not true to say, as is commonly supposed, that owing to 
the severe cold one cannot take baths daily. On the other hand, it 
is necessary that one should bathe daily in order to keep good 
health. A landlady, I know, drove away her boarder simply be-
cause he would not take his daily bath. She often used to quote: 
"Cleanliness is next to godliness", and, no matter how cold it 
was, she used to see every morning that everyone in her house 
had a bath. 
Next to bathing come travelling expenses, which should not 
amount to more than 6d per week. 
By having your room in the 
neighbourhood of the place to be most frequented by you, you 
avoid the daily expense of travelling to the place, but on Sundays 
you may visit friends and spend a few pence in travelling. Of 
course, one week you may spend a shilling if need be and not 
spend anything the next week. It is always best, whenever possible, 
to walk so that you may have exercise at the same time that you 
save the money. Nothing can be better. Many do this purposely 
in England, not so much for the sake of saving a few pence, as for 
the sake of exercise. Walking three or four miles is a pleasure in 
the cold climate of England. Indeed, whenever it is possible in 
the cold weather, a brisk walk should be preferred to a ride in a 
train or a bus. Very often the latter proves injurious. I was once 
literally stiff in a bus. 
Even the bus conductors recognize the 
danger. At intervals they run with the bus and get into it when 
they are warm. 
Six pence per week on an average may be set apart for stamps, 
etc., though such sum is hardly necessary. 
If you have your hair cut twice every month, it would cost 
you 8 d, so that 2 d per week may be put down for hair-cutting. 
Of course, you shave yourself. 
One cake of Pear's soap would last a month. 
It costs 3½d. 
So then 1 d per week may be allowed for soap. 
One penny per week may be set aside for tooth powder. This 
is rather extravagant. You can have a very fine and harmless 
tooth powder in precipitated chalk, four ounces of which can be 
GUIDE TO LONDON 
85 
had for 6 d. And an ounce would last you quite a month instead 
of a week. 
There is one big item of expenditure that should not be lost 
sight of. In winter, fire is required in the room during the day 
time if you use the room. For those who use the library in the 
case of students, the expense does not amount to much. 
But for 
others, it amounts to nearly 2 shillings per week. 
For 2 shillings 
you can get 4 scuttles of coal. But, as fire is not required gene-
rally from April to September, we may put down on an average 
one shilling per week for coals. 
This ends the extra expenditure per week which may be thus 
summed up: 
d 
Washerman's bill 
11 
Bathing 
6 
Travelling expenses 
6 
Stamps, etc. 
6 
Hair-cutting 
2 
Soap 
1 
Tooth powder 
1 
Coal 
12 
Margin 
3 
——— 
Total 4s-0d 
With 7s for the room rent and 4s for extras we have 9s 
remaining for food. It may here be remarked that a saving can be 
effected even in the 11s, whenever required, so that it may be 
spent in food or buying books and many other useful things. Thus, 
for instance, out of 6d for stamps, etc., only a penny or two may 
be spent. One penny, I suppose, would be absolutely necessary 
for writing home a postcard. Fortnightly baths (in winter espe-
cially) may take the place of weekly baths when a sponge bath is 
taken daily. 
Similarly, at times, nothing may be spent in tra-
velling. It is an expense to be counted, not necessary to be in-
curred. The aim ought to be not to spend more than one pound 
per week on an average and live comfortably. 
Passing now from this comparatively incontestable part of 
the question of the cost of living, we reach the most important 
and contestable part of the question, viz., the cost of food. 
There is so much to be said on this part of the subject, so 
much prejudice and misunderstanding to be removed that to 
treat the subject fully would require a separate and larger book. 
86 
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI 
How to get good, nutritious, healthy and palatable food 
for 9 s per week is the question before us. 
At the outset I may say that those only can live on that sum 
who "eat to live", not "live to eat". If you must have the luxuries, 
if you cannot sit at the table without company, if you must entertain 
friends pretty frequently to sumptuous dinners, if you must 
live like a gourmand, then for you ten times the sum may not be 
sufficient. But if you would live frugally and happily and not 
luxuriously, 9 s per week would be more than sufficient. 
I earnestly beseech the reader to dismiss from his mind all 
premeditated ideas, all prejudice, and he will, I am sure, see for 
himself that without entailing any loss of health, but rather 
keeping it up, he would find 9 s sufficient for his food per week. 
As nothing tells like illustrations, I would first cite illus-
trations in support of the contention that one pound a week 
is sufficient for a person of frugal habits and not born in the lap 
of luxury or rather not addicted to a luxurious mode of living. 
There are thousands of commercial gentlemen living on one 
pound a week in England. 
I had a chat with an Anglo-Indian 
here who said that he was living on one pound a week. There is a 
gentleman who is an M.A., B.E.L., Barrister-at-Law, who lived 
on 10 s a week and has yet been living on less than one pound 
a week. He is the editor of a newspaper and I have seen him 
work at the rate of 16 hours or more per diem. He was, when 
I saw him last, living on bread, figs and water. 
There are Irish M.P.'s living on one pound per week. And 
some of them are the best debaters. The late Mr. Biggor, M.P., 
I believe, lived on one pound a week. 
And what did Charles Bradlaugh do? 
Says Mrs. Annie 
Besant of him: 
He sold everything he possessed except his books. 
His home that 
he had got together by hard work, his furniture, even a diamond ring 
given him by a grateful person whom he had helped. He sent his child-
ren to school. 
His wife, not physically able to bear the life he faced, 
went to live with her parents in the country and he took two small 
rooms in Turner Street, White Chapel, for which he paid 3s 6d a week 
and where he remained until he had cleared off most of his liabilities. 
He then moved to lodgings over a music shop in Circus Road, St. John's 
Wood, where he lived for the remainder of his life, his daughters joining 
him on the death of their mother in 1877. . . . He died poor indeed 
with no personal property save his library, his Indian gifts and his very 
modest wardrobe, but he left his name free, his honour unstained. 
GUIDE TO LONDON 
87 
He began life on 10 s a week. 
And we all know how clever in-
tellectually and how strong in body he was. So far as food is con-
cerned, his food did not cost Cardinal Manning more than nine 
shillings per week if what is written about him be true. 
There are, to take a noted and living example, few harder working 
men in England than Archbishop Manning, a man full of cares and labours, 
yet I am assured by those who have had the most intimate personal 
relations with him that Mr. Disraeli in 'Lothair' has not in the least 
exaggerated his habitual abstinence and that his ordinary meal, in public 
or private, is a biscuit or a bit of bread and a glass of water. 
His strict abstinence from wines is notorious. 
Dr. Nichols from whose work the above has been taken did 
not, and probably does not, spend more than 6d a day on food. 
(3s 6d per week). He has written a book How to Live on Six Pence a 
Day, a book everybody who would live frugally ought to read. In 
it he relates his experiment with the most gratifying results. 
There are many other books written on the subject. There is 
a book entitled How to Live on One Pound a Week. 
This includes 
everything, lodging, food, clothes, etc. 
Indeed, a gentleman has even tried to limit his food expenses 
to one shilling a week and written a book on the subject. We 
however allow nine times the sum for food. 
All these instances must suffice to show that, not only is it 
possible to live on £1 a week, but many have done it. 
Has any Indian done it, some may ask? Yes, a gentleman, 
a judge from the Punjab, while I was in England came there, 
for a Barrister's education on furlough. He was over 40 years 
of age and was with his son in England. He said his pay was 
Rs. 150. He gave, he said, Rs. 50 to his wife at home and spent 
Rs. 50 for himself and his boy in London. That amounted to 
£3⅓ per month, i.e., less than £1 per week for two souls. 
This small sum was made to include many things besides those 
that we allow for one pound. 
Another Indian gentleman from Gujarat was living on less 
than 10 s per week and seemed to be quite happy. 
He shared a 
room for 4 s with a friend and thus got his accommodation for 
2 s only. This gentleman has been receiving medical education 
in England. Sadhu Narayan Hemchandra has been living on one 
pound a week.1 He has a room for 6 s a week. He spends 3 or 
4 d for washing and 7 s for food per week. 
He works very 
1 Vide An Autobiography, Pt. I, Ch. XXII. 
88 
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI 
hard. He says in his letter that he knows now German, English 
and French. In one pound per week he manages to buy his 
clothes and books of which I brought to India a boxful. He must 
have bought quite as many, if not more, by this time. 
A gentleman who has recently gone to England writes thus 
to me: 
From my last letter you might have thought very badly of me 
because I myself look upon my conduct at the time with little satisfac-
tion. 
But, as you wanted to know how I was living, I had to give you 
my sincere views. 
Since that time a great change has been brought 
about by degrees. 
What I thought an impossibility at that time is now a 
practical possibility. 
Six pounds a month are a thing of the past, and 
you will wonder to hear that, even in London, I am able to limit my 
board and lodging expenses to three pounds per month. 
With this array of facts before the reader, I hope he will 
have no difficulty in following and agreeing with me that, if one 
has the will, one can live on one pound a week and even less 
in England. 
Now we come to the solution of the question how to live on 
9s a week. 
In the first place it may be mentioned that, 
to live so 
cheaply, all the luxuries ought to be avoided, viz., tea, coffee, 
tobacco and wines and, last but not least, flesh foods. 
There are people to tell you that it is impossible to do with-
out tea in England. Some say you cannot do without coffee, others 
say you would die without tobacco, wines or meat. 
All these 
gentlemen must be questioned as to the source of their infor-
mation and the difficulty will be solved. 
It is all humbug and 
hearsay. There is difference of opinion as to flesh foods. 
As to 
the rest, every Indian who has gone to England would tell you 
that not one of them is necessary except for the sake of pleasure 
or luxury. 
However what do they think of tea and coffee in 
London? Says Dr. Nichols about tea and coffee: 
Even the milder stimulants such as tea and coffee have no appreci-
able nutritive value. If the leaves of tea or the berries of coffee had 
as much nutrition as the same weight of spinach, but an infinitesimal 
portion can be in the decoctions we drink. 
In the matter of food and 
as the materials of bone, muscle or nerve, an ounce of bread is worth 
gallons of tea or coffee. The sugar and milk drunk in them are food, 
all the rest is almost worthless. 
They soothe hunger as narcotics and 
sedatives. 
Some physiologists are of opinion that they prevent waste 
and so make less food necessary. If this were true, it would be injurious, 
GUIDE TO LONDON 
89 
for waste and the removal of waste matter are necessary to the health 
of the system. 
Tea and coffee are stimulants only and their influence 
upon the body is either inappreciable or hurtful. 
Strong decoctions of 
either stimulate the brain and nerves, produce over-action and, by com-
bating fatigue for a time, allows us to over-task our powers until we 
bring on dyspepsia, neuralgia, softening of the brain, paralysis, apoplexy. 
A distinguished Indian doctor of considerable experience, 
while talking about tea, said that he refused to treat patients who 
would not leave off tea under his treatment. However, if tea and 
coffee are to be taken, they would not mean so much more ex-
pense as so much less nutritive food. 
For they will be substi-
tuted for milk which is far better than tea or coffee. 
From a 
pecuniary point of view, a cup of tea or coffee made at home 
would cost less than a glass of milk. If tea is to be taken, it 
would be better to use condensed milk as it would be difficult 
to buy milk sufficient only for one or two cups of tea, unless 
only milk is used for making tea. 
As to tobacco, it is positively injurious to the system and an 
expensive luxury which does no good and a great deal of harm. 
Tobacco, it must be known, is very dear in England. If it is in-
dulged in, six pence would be ordinarily required daily. It cost 
an Indian gentleman £30 during his three years' stay. A good 
cigar costs 4 to 6d and a cigarette 1 d each. One can get 5 ciga-
rettes for a penny, but this is the dirtiest stuff possible. It con-
tains either ashes of tobacco or cabbage leaves. So in order to 
be able to live well on £1 a week, it is absolutely necessary to 
[abstain from]1 tobacco which "whether chewed or smoked or 
snuffed has no nutritive property but is an acrid poison, ab-
sorbed into the blood and resting upon the brain and nerves, first 
exciting and then dulling their sensibility and finally stupefying 
and paralysing." 
Thus hatefully does Count Tolstoy, than whom "few men 
have been more given to wine and cigarettes", speak of both: 
People drink and smoke not merely for want of something better 
to do to while away the time or to raise their spirits, not because of the 
pleasure they receive, but simply and solely in order to drown the warn-
ing voice of conscience. 
To illustrate the proposition he says: 
No one would take the liberty to flood with water a room in 
which people were sitting to scream and yell in it or to perform any 
1 Source is damaged here. 
90 
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI 
other acts tending to disturb or injure others and yet out of a thousand 
smokers scarcely one will hesitate to fill with noxious fumes a room the 
atmosphere of which is being breathed by women and children who do 
not smoke. 
Indeed, this nuisance is so much felt that, in railway car-
riages, 
special compartments for 
smoking are reserved. In 
orderly houses smoking rooms are set apart for young men who 
are never allowed to smoke in dining-rooms. A friend was taken 
to task for smoking in a shelter on the staircase of the house 
he was living in. 
Says the Count further: 
For the more a man stupefies himself with these stimulants, narco-
tics, the more stolid, quiescent and stagnant he becomes intellectually and 
morally. 
We all know what deeds are committed by men in a drunken 
state. 
As to the wines, the above quotations are sufficient to show 
what a man who used to drink fearfully thinks of them. It is 
not necessary to quote extracts to prove that wines are injurious 
and that we are not required to drink wines in England. There 
are hundreds of societies to convince you of the fact that wines 
are not necessary. There are many members of Parliament who 
do not drink at all. In fact, there is a teetotal party in the Com-
mons, with which are prominently associated the names W.S. 
Caine and Sir Wilfred Lawson. We have temperance societies 
in Bombay and many parts of India. There are even Anglo-Indians 
who are teetotalers. In spite of all this, persons there are, en-
lightened by the way, who believe and refuse to disbelieve, even 
though convinced, that wines are absolutely necessary in England. 
A gentleman said: "After reaching England, you may not require 
them, but somewhere in the Mediterranean sea, I am told you 
die without them." He was told. I may be allowed to tell him that, 
if the wines were so very necessary, the P. & O. Company would 
provide wines together with the food for the fees they charge and 
not make the passengers pay separately for the wines they con-
sume. If the wines were to be taken in England, and that regu-
larly, 9 s would be used up simply in drinking and it would be 
impossible to make the two ends meet for the estimate given by me. 
So, then, it is absolutely necessary to exclude wines and 
tobacco from the estimate and advisable to exclude tea and coffee, 
as the latter can be used at a sacrifice of a far more substantial 
drink: milk. 
GUIDE TO LONDON 
91 
Now we come to the question of flesh foods which, I think, must 
be abandoned if 9s are to be sufficient so as not to injure 
health. How would the Mahommedans and Parsis do, it may be 
asked in that case. For them this guide is useless. Tarry a little. 
I would ask: Are there not many Mahommedans and Parsis who, 
on account of their poverty, get flesh foods only on rare occasions 
and some on none? These surely can manage without flesh foods 
which they get but rarely in India, not for the sake of religion or 
principles, but for the sake of economy. They are free to take meat 
whenever they can get it, e.g., in their Inn if they have gone for a 
Barrister's education. If it be true that one can live on vegetable 
foods without injuring one's health, why should not all live on a 
vegetable diet because it is more economical than a meat diet? 
That vegetarianism exists in England there are living examples 
to prove. 
There are vegetarian societies and any quantity of vegetarian 
literature to testify to the existence of vegetarianism in England. 
There are living notable Englishmen who are vegetarians. 
Lord Hannen of the H.M.'s Privy Council, better known as 
Sir James Hannen, the President of the late Parnell Commission, 
is a vegetarian. 
Mr. Gotling of Bombay is a vegetarian. 
John Wesley was a vegetarian. So was Howard the philanthro-
pist and a host of others all men of light and learning. The poet 
Shelley was a vegetarian. It is impossible in the compass of a 
small book to so much as do justice to such a vast subject. I must 
content myself with referring the inquisitive reader to Perfect Way 
in Diet by Dr. Anna Kingsford1 who says of herself: 
I cured myself of tubercular consumption by living on vegetable 
food. 
A doctor told me I had not six months to live. 
What was I to 
do? 
I was to eat raw meat and drink port wine. 
Well, I went into the 
country and ate porridge and fruit and appear today on this platform. 
There is another advisable book to which the reader might 
be referred. It is entitled A Plea for Vegetarianism by H. S. Salt.2 
Dr. Benjamin Ward Richardson, M.B., L.R.C.S., etc., himself 
not a vegetarian, has come to the following conclusions in his 
Food for Man. 
1. 
Man, although possessing the capacity of existing on an animal 
diet in whole or in part, is by original cast adapted to a diet of grain 
1 Vide also An Autobiography, Pt. I, Ch. XV. 
2 Ibid., Pt. I, Ch. XIV 
92 
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI 
and fruit and, on a scientific adaptation of his natural supplies, might 
easily be provided with all he can require from that source of subsistence. 
2. 
The vegetable world is incomparable in its efficiency for supply 
of food for man when its resources are thoroughly understood and cor-
rectly applied. 
3. The supplies of food for man are most economically and safely 
drawn direct from the vegetable world. 
4. 
Diseases may be conveyed by both sources of supply, but need 
not be conveyed by either. 
Diseases may be generated by misuse of 
either source, of supply, but need not be, and under judicious manage-
ment, would not be, generated by either. 
Under a properly constituted fruit and vegetable diet, strength of 
mind and body may be as fully secured as under an animal or a mixed 
animal and vegetable system. 
He says also, "I admit that some of the 
best work has been done and is being done on a vegetarian regimen." 
If so much is conceded by a thoughtful and cautious doctor 
not a vegetarian, the reader will easily guess how much must be 
claimed by vegetarians for their system. They claim that anato-
mically, physiologically, economically and morally vegetarianism 
is far superior to meat-eating. 
From this it must be abundantly clear that vegetarianism is 
not only possible, but is really practised by hundreds of people in 
England. 
If, then, vegetarianism be as shown above as good as flesh-
eating in other respects, I hope no man, not determined upon set-
ting his face against vegetarianism at any cost, would hesitate to 
adopt it if it is cheaper than flesh-eating. 
While a vegetable soup costs 3d per plate, a meat soup costs 
from 9 d to 1/3 s and more. 
A mutton chop would cost at least 
three times as much as a vegetable chop, unless you go in for meat 
of the worst kind, and it must be borne in mind that there are 
more diseases lurking in cheap meat than in vegetables. 
It would be futile for me to demonstrate an admitted fact, viz., 
that vegetarianism costs far less than meat-eating. If there be any-
one who can contradict this, let him try to live on 9s per week 
and get flesh foods. I concede that, by a judicious management, it 
would be possible to have in that sum, if anyone thinks that he 
must have, not as a luxury but as a sheer medical necessity, meat 
once or twice a week. 
Another fact is worth mentioning here. An ordinary vege-
tarian in England does not exclude eggs from his dietary, while an 
Indian vegetarian would. As a counterpart, there are vegetarians 
GUIDE TO LONDON 
93 
in England who do not take even milk and butter, they being 
animal products. 
Before describing the food that can be had for 9 s per week, 
there are one or two points still remaining to be cleared. 
Whether you would cook the food yourself or whether you 
would have it cooked by your landlady, from a religious point of 
view, if you are a strict Hindu, you would of course cook your own 
food. In this case, your expenses would be much cheaper. 
Here let me remark, in spite of all that is said to the con-
trary, that given all the resources at your command, there is no-
thing to prevent you from leading a purely Hindu life. To say that 
there are no cooking arrangements to be had in London is hum-
bug and a mere bagatelle. It would be true to say that there are 
very few who have the mind to do it. Again, to perform the every-
day ceremonies, to dine bare-bodied, to sit in contemplation bare-
bodied for hours together would be impossible for a poor man, but 
a rich man who is prepared to spend any amount of money can 
perform each and every religious ceremony that can be performed 
in India. If he does not want to cook his own food, he can even 
take a cook with him. But, then, an ordinary student would not 
be able to command money and time for such things. I should 
like to know how many students are there who find time or have 
the mind to perform all the ceremonies even in India. If they are 
not performed here, some of them may well be left out in London 
without shocking the pious and elderly persons, as even our scrip-
tures make certain exemptions in favour of travellers and students. 
A distinguished yogi told me that he forwent most of the usual 
ceremonies while travelling. 
For an ordinary Indian who is not overscrupulous in his 
religious views and who is not much of a believer in caste restric-
tions, it would be advisable to cook partly himself and get a part 
of his food ready made. 
Of course, he can have all his things cooked by his landlady 
which, by a previous arrangement, she engages to do for 7 s 
that are paid for the rent. But, this would be found to be incon-
venient in certain cases. The landlady may not know the vege-
tarian cookery. She may not be honest; she may be very unclean. 
She may cook vegetables in utensils used for cooking meat without 
first cleaning them. The first two difficulties can be surmounted: 
she may be given a cookery book and she would cook the requir-
ed food by the help of the book. By a strict watch, she may not 
be given an opportunity for being dishonest, but if she is not clean, 
there is no help for the poor lodger if he has to be at her mercy. 
94 
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI 
The last difficulty can be overcome or overlooked. So, then, on 
the whole, it would be better to cook one's food if the landlady 
is not clean. Cooking, as perhaps would be feared, is not at all a 
difficult or troublesome process. No smoke, no wood, no cowdung 
cakes and no blowing or fanning are associated with the idea of 
cooking as here advocated. A portable oil stove serves the purpose 
of the Indian chulas. On that stove one can cook almost every-
thing that may be cooked on the Indian chulas for 5 or 6 per-
sons. Moreover, the cooking does not take much time. Twenty 
minutes would be found quite sufficient. Ten minutes are required 
for boiling milk. During the interval, while milk is boiling, many 
find it convenient to read something, e.g., a newspaper. An ena-
melled pan, one or two plates, two spoons would be your cooking 
utensils. 
The whole would cost not more than 10s. 
Water-
white kerosene oil is very good for cooking. 
It does not give any 
nasty smell and burns well. The utensils would be supplied by 
your landlady too. It is, however, advisable to buy your own pan. 
Some meals may be prepared by the landlady and some taken 
outside, e.g., breakfast and supper may be prepared by the land-
lady and the midday meal taken outside. 
Some meals may be cooked by yourself and others taken out-
side. It is not troublesome to prepare one's breakfast and supper 
which consist of simple things. 
Under every one of these modes it is possible to live on 9s 
per week. And every one of the modes has been tried by me as 
well as many others. 
The first mode is the cheapest, viz., to cook all your meals; but 
it would cost more time and may prove inconvenient for a student 
who may pass his day in his library. 
However, let us see how under the first mode, 9s would 
give us sufficient food. As has been said above, the same food that 
we usually take in India is sufficient in England. 
Then we may see what would be the cost of the Indian meals. 
For example, if you stick to the two meals per day, you have for 
dinner at 10 p.m. chapati, dal, vegetable, bhat and milk. 
Such a dinner would cost as follows: 
oz 
d 
Wheat meal flour 
8 
¾ 
Rice 
4 
½
Potatoes 
8 
¾ 
Lentils 
4 
½
Butter 
1 
1 
Salt & pepper 
¼ 
GUIDE TO LONDON 
95 
Oil for cooking 
¼ 
Milk 
½ pint 
1 
—— 
5 d 
For the evening meal, khichadi and chapati may be had. 
Rice and lentils 
16 
2 
Butter 
½ 
1 
Milk 
½ pint 
1 
Salt, pepper & oil 
½ 
½ 
—— 
4 d 
Thus, two good meals can be had for 9 d And if it be found 
desirable that a third meal should be had, 3 d can be laid out in 
milk and bread or tea and bread. This for a week would amount 
to 7 s with a balance of 2 s in our favour. 
However, it would be found convenient and perhaps better 
for health to have English vegetable dishes. You have before you 
a wide range of selection. 
In cereals you have wheat, oatmeal, maize, etc. 
In pulses you have peas, haricots, lentils, rice [sic], etc. 
In 
vegetables you have potatoes, cabbage, 
spinach, celery, 
arti-
chokes, haricot beans, green peas, tomatoes, cauliflower, parsnips, 
onions and leeks. In fruits there are fresh fruits and dry. Among 
the first class can be counted apples, oranges, grapes, bananas, 
apricots, pears, peaches, plums, strawberries, raspberries, cherries, 
etc. Among the second class are found figs, dates, currants, raisins, 
muscatel raisins and sultanas, etc. 
In nuts we have hazel, brazil nuts, almonds, chestnuts, etc. 
The above presents a variety sufficient to satisfy the most 
delicate tastes and all of these are within the reach of the 9-s 
man. 
Fruits are supposed in England to be absolutely necessary. 
At any rate, the vegetarians think so. 
They are a sure safe-
guard against medicine. They purify the blood and keep the 
bowels regular; since constipation is the father of many diseases, 
one cannot do better than take the utmost precautions to prevent 
that fell disease. This can be best done by a liberal use of whole 
wheat meal and fruits. The fine wheat flour ordinarily to be had 
in England is to be discarded altogether. It is very innutritious 
and very often injurious when it is adulterated as it very often is. 
Moreover, it is insipid. On the other hand wheat meal flour is 
very sweet to the taste. So one should always make it a point to 
use brown bread made of whole wheat meal flour and discard the 
96 
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA 
GANDHI 
white bread altogether. It may be said that the above observa-
tions are unauthenticated and useless coming from a person who 
cannot pretend to any knowledge of chemistry or medicine. Well, 
they are not unauthentic. Only the authorities have not been 
quoted. That what has been written above is the general opinion 
of doctors can be seen by reading the many vegetarian pamphlets 
published by the Vegetarian Society. It must be repeated here that 
the aim of this guide is not to supersede other useful books and 
to give all the information, its aim is to supplement, to give infor-
mation not hitherto given and to direct where the proper infor-
mation can be had. 
We assume then that food is to be selected for three meals 
from the vegetable kingdom. The meals consist of breakfast at 
8.30 a.m., dinner at 1 p.m., and supper at 6.30 p.m. 
A good breakfast may be made of oatmeal porridge—a splen-
did dish especially in winter. In almost every household, they have 
this porridge for breakfast in winter. Thousands of Scotch people 
live on oatmeal. It tastes like wheat and is sweeter. The prepa-
ration is very simple. 
You can stir one ounce of oatmeal into a 
sufficient quantity of water and put it on the oil stove. If it is fine 
oatmeal, the porridge would be ready in 20 minutes. If it is 
coarse, it would take 30 minutes. It can be eaten with sugar 
and milk or stewed fruit. 
Stewed fruit is fruit cooked in water 
with a little sugar. The porridge may be made entirely in milk or 
milk and water. Made in milk it tastes better. This breakfast 
would cost as follows: 
oz 
d 
Oatmeal 
1 
¼ 
Milk 
½ pint 
1 
Fruit (currants or raisins) 
2 
½ 
Bread 
½ 
Butter 
¾ 
—— 
3d. 
Breakfast may consist of bread (1d), butter (1d) and cheese 
(½d). It may consist of toast and milk (3d), toast, jam and tea 
(3d), bread and butter and fruit (3d), maize, muse and fruit (2d) 
bread and apples½ lb (4d per lb) (3d), bread, butter and cocoa 
(3d), bread, butter and marmalade (2½d), et ad lib. 
Soup and bread and fresh fruit or rice and milk and sugar 
would make a good dinner. Soup made of potatoes, onion and 
haricots costs 1½d. Rice, milk and sugar would cost 2d or less and 
bread 1d. This dinner, then, can be had for 4½d. And if you are 
GUIDE TO LONDON 
97 
very fond of butter, you can have a penny worth of butter in which 
case your dinner would be 5½d. 
The following variety of dinners can be had for and under 
5d: 
Pea soup and bread and stewed fruit or fresh fruit, rice, milk 
and bread and radishes and cheese. Potato soup, bread and semo-
lina with stewed fruit or milk. 
Tapioca pudding bread with almonds and raisins, etc., etc. 
Supper may consist of bread, butter and cocoa (3d), bread 
and butter and cheese (2½d), toast and milk and radishes (3d), 
porridge and fruit and bread (3d), bread, butter, celery and 
cheese, etc. 
Thus, three meals can be had for 11d or say 1s. These 
meals are quite sufficient and nourishing and give as much nutri-
tion as a sumptuous meat meal with no dyspepsia or other disease 
which is generally the consequence of the latter. Thousands subsist 
well on such meals. 
The three meals or two of them may be cooked by you or by 
your landlady. When the cooking is entrusted to the landlady, 
all the things must be bought by you so that you may be sure 
that you get the right thing at the right price. It may be re-
marked here that only those fruits and vegetables must be bought 
which are in season, otherwise they are very expensive. Moreover, 
they must be bought at the proper place. If you go to Regent 
Street and think of buying the hot-house grapes, they would cost 
3s per pound. 
These, of course, you cannot buy; but you can 
easily buy the grapes at 4d per pound when they are in season. 
Sometimes, I was going to say very often, it is found conve-
nient to take the dinner outside. Whether you be a traveller or 
a student, you would go out after breakfast and return in the eve-
ning. In such a case, you would not care to return home for 
dinner. That entails a great loss of time and trouble and you 
would not care to go home from your library, especially if it be 
some distance from your house. There are vegetarian restaurants 
in all the busy quarters of London for such people. They have 
generally two divisions. One division provides six-penny dinners of 
3 courses. You buy a ticket and, on presenting the ticket, you get 
a selection of 3 out of about 20 courses. The popularity of these 
dinners is immense. 
From 1 p.m. to 2 p.m., very often it becomes 
very difficult to find a place owing to the large number of custo-
mers. 
In the other division, you can have any number of courses and 
you pay for what you eat. A list of items called the menu is shown 
1-7 
98 
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI 
to you in which the prices are marked against each item and you 
select your dinner according to your appetite and purse. Our 9-s 
man can patronize either division. Two courses would be found to 
be quite sufficient in the first division. And three courses of the 
first division are more than sufficient even for a gourmand. It may 
be remarked that there is no difference in the quality of food in 
both the divisions. 
In fact, there are the same dishes in both. 
In the first division, you have the satisfaction to know that you 
pay more and, if you are ashamed to sit side by side with a 
labourer, to know that there is no such person to shame you in the 
first division. There is again more room in the first division called 
the dining-saloon and the hall is better ornamented. I give a speci-
men menu showing the courses generally provided in the vege-
tarian restaurants of which Dr. Richardson says: 
I confess with perfect candour that, if I could on all occasions get 
for my meals the same foods as are to be obtained in the best vegetarian 
dining-rooms, I should not take willingly any other kind of food. In time, 
I doubt not that the present centres for good vegetarian diets will become 
schools for the nation and that every hotel in the kingdom and every 
private dwelling will have its cook or housewife. 
Monday Oct. 22/88 
SOUPS 
Green pea 
3d 
Scotch broth 
3d 
Florador and milk 
3d 
Bread 
1d 
PORRIDGES 
Oatmeal 
Wheaten 
in sugar or syrup 
3d 
Maize musc 
Anglo-Scotch 
SAVOURIES 
Lentil cutlets 
Parsley se 
& sprouts 
4 
" 
" 
Turnips 
4 
" 
" 
Tomatoes 
4 
VEGETARIAN PIES 
Tomato & macaroni pudding 
4 
Yorkshire pudding se & haricots 
4 
Curried egg and rice 
4 
Sprout se & baked potatoes 
4 
EXTRA VEGETABLES 
Macaroni 
2 
Rice 
2 
Tomatoes 
2 
Haricots 
2 
Turnips 
2 
Sprouts 
2 
Baked potatoes 
2 
Mashed 
2 
" 
GUIDE TO LONDON 
99 
SWEET PUDDINGS 
College pudding 
3 
Tapioca and custard 
3 
Blanc mango & jam 
3 
Maize and peaches 
3 
Wheat and jelly 
3 
PASTRY 
Damsonpie 
3 
Apple tart 
3 
Plum 
3 
STEWED FRUITS 
Apples 
3 
Raisins 
3 
Plums 
3 
Damson 
3 
Peaches 
3 
SUNDRIES 
Wheat cake 
2 
Coffee chocolate 
2 
Cheddar 
1 
Gorgonzola 
2 
Celery 
2 
No greater variety can be required for a good selection. 
The vegetarian restaurants are closed on Sundays and bank 
holidays. On these days dinners must be taken at home. 
In dealing with this subject of food, I have simply put down 
the result of my own experience and that of others. It may inte-
rest the reader to know that the meals above enumerated give all 
the elements necessary to sustain life. It is outside the province of 
this work to show what they are and in what proportion they are 
required. That is a separate study. The enquiring reader can test 
the truth of my statement from The Perfect Way in Diet, Fruits and 
Farinacea, and such other works. 
This closes the remarks on the most important subject. There 
should be no difficulty in carrying out the above plan and, if 
carried out, it will be found that it is far better even from the 
point of view of health. For, luxury and over-eating never lead to 
health. Wise frugality in diet is the surest mode of preserving or 
attaining health. Says Dr. A. Von During: "Wouldst thou enjoy 
life, renounce life's enjoyment." 
There is an Italian proverb 
which says: "He who eats more eats less (because he shortens his 
days by gluttony)." Again Seneca says: "Multos morbos multa fer-
cula fuerunt" — "Many dishes many diseases." 
Says Professor Meyor, that first Latin professor from whose 
Why I Am a Vegetarian the above quotations are taken, with regard 
to students' extravagance: 
Many we know who, for their own persons put up with plain fare, 
blush to set before guests what costs them little. 
They deem it penurious, 
shabby, churlish. 
This prejudice certainly affects students, at least in 
England, to no small extent. 
Even thrifty men may save three shillings 
a day, i.e., a guinea a week, by adopting Spartan self-control. 
In other 
words, they may win without contest a scholarship of £50 a year, tenable 
100 
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI 
for life, purchasing into the 
bargain 
independence of character and 
health. 
Sir Henry Thomson goes so far as to say that "our eating 
is more injurious than our drinking", and who does not know 
that we are more apt to over-eat than under-eat? 
To carry out what has been mapped out above, nothing but 
a stern will is required. Given that one thing, the way is 
smooth. A little experience will accustom you to that mode of 
life. "Adopt that course of life which is best and custom will ren-
der it delightful." 
I cannot do better than close this chapter with the following 
lines from Dr. Nichol's How to Live on Six Pence a Day: 
The case of Louis Cornaro so often quoted is a very remarkable 
instance of the effects of a very temperate and simple diet in producing 
health, cheerfulness and longevity. 
At the age of 40, his constitution 
seemed ruined by what is called free living. He changed all his habits 
and lived on 12 ounces of food a day and his health became so perfect 
that for half a century he was never ill. 
When past ninety, in deference 
to his friends, he increased his food to 14 ounces a day instead of 12 
and this trifling addition nearly cost him his life. 
He became sad and 
dispirited, everything vexed him and he was attacked with a pain in the 
stomach which compelled him to return to his former diet and even to 
diminish it. 
Writing at the age of ninety-five, he describes his life as 
one of great serenity and enjoyment. 
He wrote plays, he assisted in 
fortifying and embellishing Venice. 
He enjoyed what he called his 
beautiful life. He writes: "I have attained my ninety-fifth year and find 
myself as healthy, merry and happy as if I were but twenty-five." At this 
age, and even on to a hundred years, his senses, memory, heart, judg-
ment and voice were perfect. 
He wrote seven or eight hours a day, 
walked, enjoyed society and music and sang and played delightfully. 
His 
grand-niece writes of him: "He continued healthy and even vigorous until 
he was a hundred years old. 
His mind did not at all decline. 
He never 
required spectacles. 
He did not become deaf. 
His voice remained so 
strong and harmonious that, at the close of his life, he sang with as 
much power and delight as he did at twenty." 
The reader will find in the appendix how I lived on £4 per 
month during the last year of my stay in England. 
In the above estimates no mention is made of expenses on 
account of newspapers which are found to be an absolute necessity, 
a daily food as it were. There are now in almost all the parts of 
London free public libraries, where are to be found all the leading 
daily and weekly papers. These institutions are visited by hun-
GUIDE TO LONDON 
101 
dreds of people every day. So it is always preferable to visit the 
public libraries to buying a paper. However, if necessary, there is 
a sufficient margin left for spending 6d per week on newspapers. 
The London newspapers are very cheap. An evening newspaper can 
be had for one halfpenny. 
CHAPTER IV 
A CHAPTER FOR WOULD-BE BARRISTERS 
Whether you will be a Barrister or receive some other edu-
cation in England is a question that can be best determined by 
you or those who know you best. Each man's case must be 
peculiar. I can offer only general remarks. 
For the present Barristers are at a discount. They are not so 
well thought of as they were before. This I suppose is an undispu-
ted fact. It is, however, true that they have got a status from 
which it is not easy to oust them and it is true also that they have 
got the widest field for action. And it may be said also that, with 
a large amount of patience and close application, no Barrister 
need despair of earning a decent livelihood from his own profession 
or by accepting some appointment. 
But why are the Barristers at a disadvantage? The fault is 
partly their own and partly the people's. Again, there are natu-
ral causes. 
The fault is their own because they do not come up to the 
expectations of the people. 
Of the people because they expect 
too much from them. The natural causes consist in the increase of 
their number. When there was only one newspaper, it was prized 
by all; now when there are many only few are held in estimation. 
A first matriculate was a sort of demi-god. Now when you stumble 
upon matriculates, they are sold at a nominal price. Again, when 
there was only one Barrister, he was incomparable, now there are 
many among whom to set up a comparison. 
So, then, there is no need to be fear-stricken by a little dis-
lodging of the position; only we must not lower our standard of 
work and a time may come when we may be yet too few. That 
time is distant though. And, during that time, we ought to be 
cautious so that it may not be extended any further. 
In being over-hasty we may spoil matters; in not working 
as we ought to, we may do the same. We must, therefore, guard 
against both. 
There is nowadays a tendency to do it easily, i.e., to work 
little and expect much. This ought to be avoided if we would not 
102 
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI 
be thrown further downward. If our parents send us to England, 
or if we hold a scholarship, we have a sacred trust to perform. We 
have to account to our parents or patrons for the work we have 
done and for the money which [we] have spent. We ought to do 
unto them as we would be done by. If we were to send some 
one to England at our expense to become a Barrister, I suppose we 
would expect him to utilize every moment of his stay there and 
give us an account of how he passed his time. Exactly the same 
would be expected of us. Consciousness of this and work according 
to it are all that is required of us. If we do that, we shall have 
done our duty and will have no occasion to be sorry for having 
gone to England. When we go there to be Barristers, we ought 
to do there everything that would make of us good Barristers and 
not indulge in luxuries or pleasures. 
Let those who send their boys to England make sure that they 
would discharge their trust faithfully and they will have no occasion 
to regret having sent them. The best way to ensure this is to give 
your boy just enough money to make of him a Barrister and then 
tell him plainly that he should expect no more. Make a certain 
provision for him on his return from England for a year or two 
and then let him know that he shall be left to himself to earn his 
living. This may seem a little hard, but once done it would be a 
source of the highest happiness, or else it will be a source of woe 
and misery both to the parents and the boy. 
Are there already too many Barristers? Yes and no. Yes, if 
we take any one province into account, but, if India as a whole 
were taken into account, there are far too few. 
That Barristers 
have a field in any of Her Majesty's dominions seems to have 
either been forgotten or not cared for, because every Barrister goes 
to his native land to practise. Now, while in one's fatherland there 
is some chance of success owing to acquaintances and knowledge of 
the native country, there is much disadvantage if the profession is 
overcrowded. Why not then invade the regions not yet invaded? 
Then, again, a field, I am told, is sure to be opened as well 
for Barristers as for all educated persons in the protected States. 
They are yet in a very backward state. They are expected to make 
reforms. When that time comes, the aid of the educated of the 
land is likely to be called in. Again, it is a notorious fact that so 
far education has been too much neglected by the agencies and 
back-door influence has prevailed. 
This too will be set right 
some day. 
I must not, however, be misunderstood to advocate the 
Indians flocking to England to become Barristers. Whether it is 
GUIDE TO LONDON 
103 
good to be a Barrister or not is not the province of this guide to 
discuss. There are many other guides to throw light on that mat-
ter. Indeed, I must confess freely my incompetence to aid the 
discussion of that question. I am simply to guide those who have 
made up their minds to be Barristers as to what they would be 
required to spend, what examinations they have to pass, how 
they would gain admission, etc. It was not without many misgivings 
and hesitation that I was induced to insert even the above para-
graphs. 
Supposing, then, that you have made up your mind to become 
a Barrister, the first thing for you to do is to get a certificate of 
your having passed the matriculation examination. If you have 
not passed the matriculation examination, you will be required 
to pass an entrance examination before admission. They examine 
in History and Latin, but Indian students are by an application 
exempted from the Latin examination. The examination is rather 
easy. 
This done you get the form of admission for one guinea; you 
pay the fees which amount to nearly £141. 
Those who have joined some university are exempted from 
the payment of £100 in the beginning, though they have to pay 
the sum in the end. In Lincoln's Inn, those who have passed 
public examination only in the British Dominions are 
exempted 
from that payment. I am not sure whether this applies to Indian 
Universities. Such information can be had directly by writing to 
the treasurers of the respective Inns of which there are four, viz., 
Inner Temple, Middle Temple, Lincoln's Inn and Gray's Inn. 
Perhaps, from an economic point of view, Lincoln's Inn is the 
best Inn, which boasts also the best library. Middle Temple is the 
most patronized by the Indians. From the education point of 
view, all the Inns are equal because they have a common exa-
mination. Middle Temple gives the greatest number of scholarships 
and studentships. Moreover, the Middle Temple pays the scholar-
ships in cash, the Inner Temple makes you join chambers and 
pays for them. 
One has to keep twelve terms before being called to the bar. 
There are four terms every year, the 1st in January, the 2nd in 
April, the 3rd in June and the 4th in November. The shortest 
term lasts 20 days and the longest about 31 days. 
Keeping terms means taking dinners in the respective Inns to 
which you belong; you have not necessarily to take your dinner 
but you must go to the dining-hall punctually at the appointed 
time and sit there for one hour. You are said to have kept one 
104 
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI 
term when you have attended six dinners in the term. Those who 
belong to a university have to attend only three dinners. These 
dinners, whether partaken of or not, have to be paid for. Inner 
Temple charges 3½s per dinner, Middle Temple 2s. 
Thus you 
make a saving of 1½s every dinner by joining the Middle Tem-
ple. And such dinners have to be taken 12 times in all. Lin-
coln's Inn and Gray's Inn, too, charge most probably 2s. 
If you pay for the dinners and if you have no religious objec-
tion, why should you not take your dinner, one may pertinently 
ask? The answer is you ought to dine, but, then, a further ques-
tion arises as to what a vegetarian should do. Well, you can have 
ordinarily bread and vegetables and cheese, but you can have a 
better vegetarian dinner specially prepared for you by applying 
to the chief steward of the Inn or, if need be, the sub-treasurer of 
your Inn. A Parsi friend who had turned a vegetarian and I used 
to get our vegetarian dinners specially prepared. 
And it is better that every Indian should insist [on this] so 
that, in future, every Inn may make it a rule to prepare vege-
tarian dinners regularly. 
To be fit for being called to the Bar at the end of 12 terms, 
two examinations must be passed, one in Roman Law and the 
other in the English Laws. 
A student can appear in the Roman Law examination after 
—but not before—keeping four terms. Thus, after reaching Eng-
land, the student has one year at least to prepare for the exami-
nation which is much more than what is required for the purpo-
ses of passing the examination; hence, the brilliant results of the 
examination. For Roman Law, Saunders' Justinian is the text-
book. Many students, however, read Hunter's Introduction to Roman 
Law. 
The other examination called the Bar Final a student can 
appear in after—but not before—keeping nine terms, i.e., at the 
end of two years after admission. This time, too, is more than 
enough for the examination. The examination takes place in the 
Law of Property, Common Law including Criminal Law and 
Equity, and lasts for four days. It used to last only three days, 
but now there are two Equity papers instead of one. 
For the Law of Property the prescribed books are: 
William's 
Real Property 
" 
Personal 
Property 
Goodeve's Real Property 
" 
Personal 
Property 
Edward's Compendium of the Law of Property in Land. 
GUIDE TO LONDON 
105 
Students, however, generally find it sufficient to read William's 
and Goodeve's Real Property and Goodeve's Personal Property. Very 
few read William's on personal property. They read besides, vari-
ous guides to the examination. In Law the prescribed Common 
book is Broom's Common Law. Indermauer's Common Law is, how-
ever, read in addition to or instead of Broom by the students. For 
Equity the prescribed book is Snell's Equity. 
The matter of the examination changes almost every year. 
Thus, while generally a competent knowledge of the English laws 
is required, special subjects are prescribed every year. For instance, 
for Equity they sometimes prescribe certain portions only (e.g., 
trusts, mortgages, etc.) from White and Tudor's Leading Cases in 
Equity. Those, however, who are well grounded in the general 
principles of law do not find it difficult to pass. 
The latest prospectus1 of the Council of Legal Education is 
appended hereto. 
A notion seems to prevail in many quarters that students 
are called to the bar without any examinations or that the exa-
minations are a farce. Both these statements are entirely without 
foundation and inventions of fertile brains. 
No doubt the examinations are easy or, rather, found to be 
easy. The results are generally good. There are two or three 
reasons for the examinations being found easy. 
In the first place, they take place four times every year. So, 
then, if a student fails, the failure does not shock him so much as 
it does in India. In England he can re-appear in three months. 
Secondly, the time at the student's disposal for preparation 
is ample. While both the examinations are a year's work at the 
rate of 6 hours per day, to ensure success there are clear two 
years at the student's disposal. So, then, the preparation can be 
made with a light heart and without having to work hard. Whe-
ther it is good that more than sufficient time should be given for 
preparation is another question altogether, but let there be only 
three months for preparing for the examinations and we shall have 
cutting [sic] results and a different verdict. 
Thirdly, there are many facilities for study in the shape of 
tutors, etc. It is only in rare cases that tutors should be resorted to. 
It is a useless waste of money. And a tutored student never goes 
beyond what is required and forgets what he has learnt soon after 
the examination. Such is the experience of many. Nothing like 
self-preparation. 
1 This is not available. 
106 
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI 
It is worthy of notice that the tendency nowadays is happily 
to raise the standard of the examinations. They have begun to 
prescribe more useful matter now. 
The latest prospectus is a 
substantial improvement on the prospectus of two years ago. For 
merely a knowledge of Evidence was not [then] necessary; now, 
however, it is. 
Students generally study for themselves 
through lectures 
common to the four Inns. Special lectures, too, are organized by 
each Inn. These lectures are generally attended by those students 
only who want to compete for scholarship examinations which 
are quite distinct from pass examinations. But, attending the lec-
tures has now been made indirectly compulsory as the examinations 
are held on the subject of lectures. 
Call to the bar is a mere formal ceremony. 
After you are called, a certificate is given to you and you 
have to apply for a special certificate if you want to practise in 
India or the Colonies. 
Before leaving England, students, now Barristers, generally 
get their names enrolled in Her Majesty's High Court of Justice 
on a payment of 5 shillings. 
It may be important here to discuss whether it is desirable 
that the student should try for scholarship examinations. It has 
been said above that, for the purposes of passing the examinations, 
the time at the student's disposal is more than enough. The ques-
tion, therefore, is what shall he do with the rest of his time? It 
may be answered—he will devote it to private study. Now this 
is all very well to say. There are persons who do study as well for 
the sake of study as for an examination. But these are exceptions 
to prove the rule that, unless a person has a task imposed on 
him, he will not generally do it only because it is good. Private 
study very often gives place to other pursuits, not so study for an 
examination. It, therefore, seems better to impose some exami-
nation task upon oneself than to rely upon one's own will-power 
to take care of private study. 
And, in that case, it is difficult to say whether it is better 
to compete for some scholarship or to join some University. 
In going in for scholarships there is one drawback. The competi-
tion is unequal. There may be M.A.'s, B.A.'s and other University 
men against mere matriculates who would stand a very poor 
chance of winning scholarships. For those who have graduated in 
India nothing can be better than trying for the scholarship exa-
minations. Indeed, there are students who do both—join a Uni-
versity and work for a scholarship. Matriculates and others, if 
GUIDE TO LONDON 
107 
they try for a scholarship, while they may not be successful in get-
ting one, will have the satisfaction of knowing that they have ad-
ded to the stock of their knowledge and done some useful work. It 
may, however, be thought more advisable for them to graduate 
in one of the Universities. Then comes the question of a selection 
of University. There are Cambridge and Oxford Universities on 
one side and London University on the other. So far as substan-
tial knowledge is concerned, London University is by far the best. 
And if a University is to be joined for enjoyment and pleasures, 
of course London University would lag far behind. Oxford and 
Cambridge would win the palm. There is no, what is called, 
University life in London of which there is plenty in Oxford and 
Cambridge. London University is an examining body merely and 
does not require candidates to have kept any terms. There is no 
doubt an opportunity of mixing with Professors in Oxford and 
Cambridge which is not be found in London. 
It is said that education in Oxford and Cambridge is very 
costly. To graduate and become a Barrister would cost at least 
Rs. 15,000 Though I have no personal experience of either, I can 
say that education in either should not cost anything more than 
Barrister's education except the actual expenses of fees and books. 
Of course, to live with such economy one will have to remain a 
non-collegiate student. No such charge, however, can be brought 
against the London University. And, on that account, it would 
be better to graduate from the London University. The great advan-
tage of the London University is that it holds its examinations even 
in India. London University would be found better by vege-
tarians as there are more facilities for them in London than any-
where else. 
Now, this University is so exacting that even an M.A. or B.A. 
of any other University has to matriculate in the London Univer-
sity before he can appear for any of its degree examinations. But, 
after passing the matriculation examination, one can appear in its 
Law examinations without having to pass the B.A. examination, 
as is the case in the Bombay University. The London LL.B. course 
nearly extends to three years after matriculation. So, in three years 
one can pass the matriculation and the intermediate LL.B. exami-
nation together with being called to the bar. 
Such a course of 
training would keep the student's hands pretty full and he will 
find no time to devote to idle amusements and this would not mean 
an extra outlay over and above the cost of a Barrister's education 
of more than £20 to 25. 
The cost of Barrister's education: 
108 
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI 
In order to be called to the bar, it is necessary to leave for 
England so as to reach there in time for keeping the November 
term. If you start in October or September, you can return in the 
July of your third year's stay in England. By starting in any other 
month you can return in that month of your third year's stay in 
England, which is previous to the month you started in for 
England. Except for the saving of two months by starting in Octo-
ber, it has been shown in a previous chapter that March is the best 
month to start in for England. 
For three years' stay in England we have, in the previous 
chapter, calculated the expenses of board and lodging in London, 
which amount to £4 per month. 
So £150 may be allowed for 
board and lodging in England during the three years' stay in Eng-
land. A list of clothes, too, has been given in a previous chap-
ter. The clothes contained [in the list] in that chapter would be 
quite sufficient at least for the first year, though by a judicious 
use no more may be required for two years. However, a further 
list of clothes is appended below. These may be bought as requir-
ed. But more should in no case be required. According to one's 
fancy changes may be made. The sum to be expended in clothing 
should not be exceeded. 
£ 
s d 
3 
pairs of trousers 
1 16 0 
1 
jacket suit (vest & jacket) 
2 0 0 
3 
white shirts 
0 6 0 
2 
woollen shirts 
0 16 0 
2 
woollen undervests or merino 
0 11 0 
4 
cotton undervests 
0 8 0 
2 
woollen drawers 
0 13 0 
6 
pairs of woollen socks 
0 12 0 
———— 
£ 7 2 0 
———— 
12 
pairs of merino or cotton socks 
0 9 0 
12 
cotton handkerchiefs 
0 2 0 
2 
felt hats 
0 
7 0 
6 
neckties 
0 
3 0 
1 
slippers 
0 
2 0 
4 
pairs of boots and shoes 
1 12 0 
1 
pair of gloves 
0 
3 0 
———— 
£ 10 
0 0 
GUIDE TO LONDON 
109 
£ 
s d 
brought forward 
10 
0 0 
3 
tooth brushes 
0 1 6 
2 
umbrellas 
0 11 0 
1 
razor 
0 3 0 
1 
evening suit on hire for one evening 
0 5 0 
1 
gown 
1 10 0 
4 
cotton or merino drawers 
0 11 0 
1 
oil stove 
0 
5 6 
1 
enamelled pan 
0 
1 6 
2 
spoons 
0 
2 0 
plates 
0 
1 0 
——— 
£ 13 11 6 
It must be understood that there is room for economy in the 
above list as well as the list given in the previous chapter, economy 
both as regards quantity and prices. When the lists were shown to 
a friend who is rather exacting than otherwise, he pronounced 
it to be extravagant. The evening dress mentioned at the bottom 
in the list is meant for the call night. It is compulsory to wear 
the dress on the call night, so they say. No one seems to have 
tried to appear in the ordinary dress. 
The experiment is worth 
trying. However, if one has to wear the evening dress, he can have 
it on hire for one evening for 5s at many shops in the Strand or 
Fleet Street. 
It may be borrowed from friends. It may not be 
superfluous to mention that expenses of mending shoes or clothes 
at times are included in the £1 per week. 
Shoes are the article 
requiring repair rather often. They can be mended for 1/6 per 
pair or less. In the list will be found mentioned the oil stove and 
pan, etc. They are meant for cooking. They will prove very use-
ful at times if not always. When travelling, cheap food may not 
be procurable, the landlady being not a good cook or from vari-
ous other causes. In such cases it will be best to cook one's food. 
There remain now to be considered the expenses on account 
of fees and dues to be given to the Inns. 
They are as follows in the Inner Temple: 
£ 
s 
d 
Admission form 
1 
1 0 
Stamp dues and fees 
35 
6 
5 
Lecture fees 
5 
5 
0 
Commons & dues & dinners for 12 terms 
15 13 
0 
Call certificate for the Colonies 
0 12 
0 
110 
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI 
Call fees 
94 10 
0 
———— 
£ 152 7 11 
Enrolment in the High Court 
0 
5 
0 
———— 
£ 
152 12 11 
These were the fees paid by me. Now, if the Middle Temple 
is joined and if there are no fees besides those charged in the Inner 
Temple, as there are probably not, 72 times 1½s, i.e., 
£ 5-8-0 
can be saved as the Middle Temple dinner costs only 2 s [as 
compared] to the 3½s of the Inner Temple. 
I know that in no 
case do the fees exceed £ 152-7-11. Hence £ 153 may be put down 
as the highest expenses for fees. 
Then we come to books. 
Before enumerating the books, it 
may be remarked that the libraries of the several Inns are meant 
for the use of their members and it will be their own fault if 
they do not make a liberal use of them. Thus, all of the big works 
on law which have to be read for the scholarship examination 
will be found in the library. All the works just to be mentioned 
will also be found in the library. However, they being books of 
daily reference may be bought. There are law lending libraries 
in London which entitle their members to issue books to be 
kept for a month, three months, etc., according to the subscrip-
tion they pay. So then he who wants to practise further economy 
may make use of these libraries, too. 
And, in passing, I may mention that such economy sometimes 
becomes very necessary. You may think of travelling and yet may 
not afford to spend more than a given sum which did not include 
travelling expenses. In that case you must save somewhere. An 
instance will be found of a saving thus effected in Appendix A. 
A few odd shillings or pence saved now and then and collected 
swell up the savings to a decent sum which may be spent in 
various other useful pursuits. A mention has nowhere been made 
of theatres which are a national institution in England and, as 
some suppose, a seat of education and amusement combined. 
They moreover portray the modern habits and customs of Eng-
land. No one would return to India without visiting the thea-
tres. Then, where is provision for that in the estimates provided 
in this guide, it may be asked. They are provided for generally 
in the one pound a week and also in the estimates provided for 
clothing where a margin has been left for cutting down. Theatres 
do not cost much. Gallery seats are one shilling each and pit 
2 or 3½d each. 
The last seats are used by respectable middle-
GUIDE TO LONDON 
111 
class persons and frequently patronized by the Indians. Once a 
month on an average is more than sufficient and the reader will 
have remarked that an ample margin has been left for saving 
even 4 times 2s. The arrangements given in the guide will have 
to be disturbed only when some big expense has to be incurred. 
Thus, if a travel has to be undertaken and if the average limit of 
£4 is not to be overstepped, a saving may be effected, e.g., by 
removing to a cheaper room. 
To return, however, to the libraries. 
It has been alluded 
to in the previous chapter that it will be convenient to pass most 
of your time in the library of your Inn. 
For even a luxuriously 
fitted room would not be so comfortable and suitable as the library 
hall which is always well-warmed and ventilated. 
The books to be required are as follows. 
All the booksellers 
give a 25 per cent discount on books of general literature and 20% 
on law books. The prices in the second column are prices minus 
discount. 
£ s d 
£ 
s d 
Saunders' Justinian 
0 18 0 
0 15 0 
Hunter's Introduction to Roman Law 
0 
7 6 
0 6 0 
William's Real Property 
1 
1 0 
0 17 0 
Goodeve's Real Property 
1 
1 0 
0 17 0 
Goodeve's Personal Property 
1 
1 0 
0 17 0 
Broom's Common Law 
1 5 0 
1 0 0 
Indermauer's Common Law 
1 0 0 
0 16 0 
Snell's Equity 
1 0 0 
1 0 0 
Extra 
3 12 0 
———
 
Total 
£ 10 
0 0 
There is now only one item of expenditure to be considered, 
viz., the fare on returning, which is £35. 
Thus the total expenses of a Barrister's education are: 
£ 
Dress in Bombay 
18 
Fare from Bombay to London 
24 
Dress in London 
14 
Fees, etc. 
153 
Board and lodging during three years in London 
150 
Books 
10 
Fare from London to Bombay 
35 
Emergencies, etc. 
16 
——
 
£ 420 
112 
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI 
This brings down the expenses of a Barrister's education to 
£420 which, as the reader must have seen, is capable of being 
reduced to £400 quite easily. 
There are three items, viz., dress in 
Bombay, that in London and books, which evidently admit of a 
reduction of £4 and the emergency sum ought really to find no 
place in the estimate as that has been taken into account in the 
£150 for board and lodging. 
Attention ought to be drawn to the first two items which have 
been estimated in rupees and then reduced to pounds sterling at 
the present rate of exchange which is nearly Rs. 16 for one pound. 
In rupees, as will have been noticed, it amounts to nearly Rs. 653; 
represented in pounds, it would fluctuate with the exchange. 
The passage Rs. 370, too, is subject to variation. 
Already 
owing to the sinking down of the rupee, the passage has been 
raised some 20 p.c. If the rate goes higher, as it is expected to, 
[it] is likely that the fare would be brought down to its original 
value. 
Now it has to be discussed how many pounds you will take 
with you. Of course, Rs. 653 or thereabouts will be spent in 
Bombay. On reaching London you will have to pay your fees 
amounting to nearly £141. 
Out of this £41 are taken as fee and 
£100 as deposit as security for further dues to your Inn. 
It has 
been said above that this deposit is excused in certain cases. If you 
are sure that you come under the excuse rules, you may take £100 
less. But, in all other cases, take with you or be sure that you 
will get on your landing in England at least 175 pounds sterling. 
If you take money with you, of course, you would not take it in 
cash, but take a bill of exchange to some bank. Messrs Hutchin-
son & Co., are good bankers and cater for Indian customers. Mr. 
Wm. Digby is concerned with the business. 
They undertake to 
supply gratis the requisite information to Indians about lodging, 
etc. I do not suppose they would be able, however, to show them 
cheap lodgings. They have got a list of families who take Indians, 
as boarders, but these families charge nearly 30s per week for board 
and lodging. Some charge even 25s. But they may be told that you 
want to live cheaply and perhaps they would secure you good 
lodgings. 
On this point, however, the editor of The Vegetarian 
would be the best guide. He has promised to find suitable lodg-
ing for Indians asking for his advice. 
That is by the way. 
As 
bankers, Messrs Hutchinson & Co. would be quite good. Their 
address in London is:1
1 The source carries no address. 
GUIDE TO LONDON 
113 
Messrs Thomas Cook & Sons, Hornby Road, Bombay, also 
are good and well-known bankers. Many Indians have their ac-
counts with them. All these firms get their customers' letters free 
of charge. It is better, however, to get your letters at your Inn 
or at your lodging when you have fixed upon one. 
It would be advisable to keep two or three pounds with you in 
cash in order to pay for your railway-ticket on landing in London 
and to pay a few shillings to the steward of your cabin or to pay for 
boat hires if you land at various stations touched by your boat. 
Although the estimates supplied are not the lowest possible 
it is supposed that no one would venture to go to England who 
could not afford £420, i.e., at the present rate of exchange 
Rs. 6,720. I have, however, a word to say further. If you have got 
Rs. 10,000, do not spend all in London, thinking that you would 
be able to lead a happier life there. 
I shall just diverge from my main subject. I am going im-
mediately to point out that, from every point of view, the life 
you would have to lead on £420 would be happier than the life 
led by many a student in India. And mind, Rs. 10,000 would not 
supply you with luxuries. They would simply make you pine for 
more to vie with your luxurious brothers and thus, in fact, make 
you more miserable. Did you say one room in England would 
not be sufficient for you? I ask you, then, what have you been 
having here? Do you not sleep, even though you may be the son 
of a rich man, two or three in one room, a room without a car-
pet, without any furniture, surrounded by dirty ditches having 
hardly a window or two? 
Have you not in Bombay used the 
same room for kitchen, bed-room and sitting room? Why, I have 
seen very rich students spending money like water living in a 
dirty house not even swept daily. Did you say you could not live 
on the food provided in the book? Well, if so, you can only be 
pitied. 
I am sure that you are having no better food here. Do 
you always taste, much less eat1, fruit in India? 
Do you not 
subsist on two meals only, in India, with milk only once in the 
day? Did you say you could not cook your food? Well, if so, it is 
not absolutely necessary that you should cook in London except for 
your religion. But, does not many a student, if not you, cook his 
food in India and in what? In the miserable fire-places, blowing 
the fire, now and then spoiling the clothes and having the eyes 
quite red with smoke after the dinner is cooked. In the place of 
all this, what do you have in England on one pound per week? 
1 The source has 'cut', obviously a slip. 
1-8 
114 
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI 
A nice comfortable room all to yourself, a room with a nice carpet 
specklessly clean, a nice bedstead with a feather bed, two pillows, 
looking-glass, washing-stand, chairs, etc. (see the description ante). 
The maid of the house always makes the bedding for you, washes 
your basin and dances attendance on you whenever you want her 
and does all the household work for you. You have not to cry 
out aloud for her, but just touch the bell and she knocks at your 
door and enters only when you say, yes. 
That surely is not a 
miserable life and, if it be miserable, the Rs. 10,000 would not make 
it less so. 
To return, then, to our subject from the digression: if you 
have Rs. 10,000, keep them. Only spend out of them Rs. 6,000 or 
the equivalent of £420. And the rest you will be able to com-
mand on your return to India. What a relief! Just ask a junior 
how he felt to be told that he would be able to command some 
Rs. 2,000 to go on with in India and you will gauge the measure 
of relief. 
But, if you spend the whole Rs. 10,000, why, to find 
yourself without money on your return would cause far greater 
pain than the additional happiness, which you may expect but are 
sure not to get by spending more than £420 worth of rupees. It 
is absolutely necessary that you should have some money, [Rs.] 
1,000, 2,000 or any such sum at your disposal. Then you would 
not regret having gone to England. On that you would be able 
to build your position, but, if you have not got the foundation 
money, any edifice you may hope to build without that foundation 
would crumble down to pieces and you would find yourself in the 
open air without an edifice. For there is no work awaiting you on 
your return. There may be empty honours and congratulations 
just to sting you. Even if there be work, perhaps, without a know-
ledge of practice you will not be able to accept it. Therefore, if 
you would take the advice of one who has undergone the bitter 
experience and would profit by it, if you have Rs. 10,000, only spend 
£420 worth and keep the rest to be spent in India and you would 
be happy and contented. No one would point his finger at you; 
your position you would not feel unstable. And, in two years or 
so, according to abilities and opportunities, you would be able to 
establish yourself as a respectable Barrister. Nay, more, the eco-
nomical habits cultivated in England would stand you in good 
stead in India. You would then be able to "pull on" better and 
not feel the want of the luxurious way of living. 
Indeed, if you do not expect to command about Rs. 2,000 on 
your return, it were advisable not to go to England at all for a 
Barrister's education unless, of course, you expect to get some 
GUIDE TO LONDON 
115 
suitable appointment. For, the Rs. 2,000 or some such sum are as 
indispensable for India as the £420 for England. 
Too much stress cannot be laid, if you want to practise in 
India on your return, on the importance of studying the Indian 
Codes in England. These books will be available in your library. 
Whitley 
Stoke's 
Anglo-Indian 
Codes 
are 
very popular with 
Indian students in England. 
There are books published for the information and guidance 
of those wishing to go to England for study. They invariably give 
much higher estimates than those given here. It will occupy a 
very large space to answer them here. I can only say that they 
may be read side by side with this and compared. There is, how-
ever, an association doing good work for Indians that deserves 
notice. It is the National Indian Association. So long as it can 
count upon the active services of that good and philanthropic lady, 
Miss E. A. Manning, 35 Bloomfield Road, Maiden Hill, the Asso-
ciation cannot fail to do good. She may, indeed, be consulted by 
every Indian whom she is always willing to help and give kind 
advice to. But the information given by the Association is, I am 
afraid, not trustworthy. The estimates furnished by it are too 
extravagant. I have talked to some of those who were put under 
the care of the Association, and they told me that the estimates 
given were extravagant. They are as follows in the India Magazine 
and Review, the organ of the Association: 
With regard to expenses it is estimated that the amount required 
will be: 
For an ordinary school education, from £150 to 200 a year accord-
ing to the age of the pupil and the standing of the school. 
For a student at the University 
300 a year 
For an Indian Civil Service student 
300 " 
" 
For a student of engineering 
300 " " 
For a law student at the Inns of Court 
250 " " 
For a medical student 
250 " " 
For an agricultural student 
250 " " 
These sums include tuition, board and residence, dress, vacation ex-
penses and cost of superintendence. Fees for entrance at one of the Inns 
of Court amounting to nearly £150 are not included in the above esti-
mate. The sum of £30 is also required to meet the expenses of outfit 
on arrival. 
So, according to the above, the expenses amount to £250 per 
year, i.e., £750 in three years. Add to that £150 for fees, not 
included in the above, as also £30 for dress, and I suppose about 
116 
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI 
£18 in Bombay and also the fares to and from London, about £ 60, 
and we get £1,008. These estimates include tuition and superin-
tendence not calculated in the estimates given in the guide. And 
he must be in a sorry plight, indeed, who would require tuition 
for passing the Bar Final examination and superintendence so that 
he may not go astray. Will it not be better to keep your boy with 
you if he required a strict watch than trust him to the superin-
tendence of a committee not one of whom you know personally? 
It must be by this time clear to those who know or must know 
that no amount of superintendence, especially of the above type, 
would set a student right if he is bent upon going astray. 
He 
must be trusted to take care of himself or not sent at all. Only, 
he must not be given a full command of the purse so that he 
may play fast and loose with it. 
It is the purse more than 
anything else that is the most powerful instrument in spoiling a 
student in England. Why, it would be quite safe to undertake 
to spoil two students on £ 250 a year. It is not, however, for a 
moment argued that a single penny more than £50 a year spent 
would be credited to extravagance. 
Far from it. Even £500 a 
year can be spent usefully in England. The aim of this guide is 
not, however, to show how £500 can be spent usefully per year 
in England, but to show that one can live happily on £50 per year 
and do all the things generally done by Indian students in England 
spending much more. 
In Appendix A, it will be found how from £15 per month 
I came down to £4 per month and, in so doing, how I was not 
obliged to sacrifice any of the comforts I used to enjoy before. 
APPENDIX A 
It was on the 4th September 1888 that I left for England to 
receive a Barrister's education per S.S. 
The Clyde. 
I had two 
Indian companions with me whom I did not know before.1 The 
mere fact that we were three Indians was a sufficient introduction 
to us. 
How I managed on the steamer:2 As I was not sure that I 
would be able to partake of the vegetable foods provided on the 
steamer, I was well provided with Indian sweets, ganthias, and 
plenty of Indian fruits. This was my first experience of a voyage 
on a steamer. I was, therefore, very modest and shy and would 
not go to the table to partake even of tea. 
1 Vide "London Diary", 12-11-1888. 
2 Vide An Autobiography, Pt. I, Ch. XIII. 
GUIDE TO LONDON 
117 
I, therefore, began with the sweets. 
I lived upon them 
exclusively for about two or three days and could have done so 
for a long time, but one of the Indian friends mentioned above was 
very fond of his roti and rice and dal; so he arranged with one of 
the native sailors to cook us some Indian dishes. The flour and 
other articles were provided free of charge by the steamer autho-
rities. So we lived on these Indian dishes. The sailors were very 
dirty and I generally preferred the English loaf to the roti. In spite 
of the persuasions of the brother passengers, I could not persuade 
myself to sit at the table with them to eat. I was so modest. Dur-
ing the return voyage, however, I naturally managed better. I 
was not ashamed to sit at the same table with other passengers. 
And it is very desirable that, if one has no religious objections, 
to do so even on going to England. There is sufficient vegetable 
food provided on the steamer. 
I, however, requested the chief 
steward to supply some vegetable foods and I had usually for 
breakfast oatmeal porridge, milk and stewed fruit and bread, butter 
and jam and marmalade and cocoa. For dinner I had rice, 
vegetable curry, milk and jam pastry, stewed fruit, bread and 
butter. For supper bread, butter, jam, cocoa, some lettuce with 
pepper and salt and cheese. I had only three meals per day. Two 
days in the week they provide fresh fruit and nuts on the steamer. 
How I began on 12 pounds per month: 
After staying with a friend for a month who treated me very 
kindly and taught me how to behave and how to use the fork 
and the spoon,1 I removed to a family where I had to pay 
30s per week for board and lodging. Thus, my board and lodg-
ing cost me only £6. 
I was told, however, that living on £12 
per month would be considered very economical. 
I therefore 
managed somehow or other to spend £12 per month. 
I did not 
discard tea from the very beginning. Did I believe at first in 
taking only three meals per day? A suggestion was thrown out 
by somebody that I would be considered to be stingy if I took 
all meals every day in the family and tea very often. Following 
up this suggestion, I used to lunch outside at least once a week 
and take tea only thrice a week. Thus, I paid for all this in the 
family; I spent about 10s in the lunching and taking tea outside. 
I used to spend unnecessarily a great deal also in travelling. It need 
hardly be said here that taking your meals or tea outside pur-
posely to show that you are not stingy or that you are roll-
ing in wealth is anything but gentlemanly and entirely un-
1 Vide An Autobiography, Pt. I, Ch. XIV. 
118 
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI 
necessary. Of course, it is another thing altogether when you have 
to dine or take tea outside because you have to go far for some 
business and it would be a waste of time to return home for tea. 
Again, while living in the family, you are supposed to be punc-
tual. They have fixed times for all the meals and they do not or 
are not expected to wait for you. So, if you are outside and if you 
think that you would not reach in time for your meal, that would 
be a case of dining outside. These occasions are rare and do not 
at all prove costly, though one who would live on £ 4 per month 
cannot afford to do these things. He cannot even get into a good 
family for £1 per week. 
The food they used to provide for dinner was third-rate; (no 
fault of the family. I was the first vegetarian boarder with them): 
vegetable soups and a vegetable, mostly potatoes, and some fresh 
fruit. For breakfast they gave me bread and butter and jam and 
tea and I had porridge occasionally. For lunch they gave me 
bread and butter and cheese invariably. For tea, bread and 
butter and tea and cake sometimes. 
All this did not cost them 
more than 7s per week. 
Thus, it will be seen that I paid 30s 
not because the cost of giving board and lodging was so much or 
even half so much, but because of the privilege of being allowed 
to enjoy their company. 
It is generally thought desirable to live in families in order 
to learn the English manners and customs. This may be good for 
a few months, but to pass three years in a family is not only un-
necessary but often tiresome. And it would be impossible to lead 
a regular student's life in the family. This is the experience of 
many Indians. If you live in a family, you must—it is only fair 
—sacrifice some time for them if only. . . 1 
. . . was to cook the morning and the evening meals and to have 
the midday meal outside. 
I was to spend at the most 8 s for 
one room per week, 6d breakfast, supper and one shilling at the 
most, for dinner. I was told that there was a vegetarian restaurant 
in Brighton.2 
On reaching Brighton, it was after some difficulty that I could 
get a good room. The landladies could not be persuaded to be-
lieve that the room would not be spoiled by my cooking in the 
1 Pages 5, 6, 7 & 8 are missing. 
2 Vide An Autobiography, Pt. I, Ch. XIX. 
GUIDE TO LONDON 
119 
room. 
One of them said: "No, I cannot give the room even 
for 20s. 
The whole carpet would be spoiled by stain of grease and 
no one else after you leave would take my room." I however 
assured her that she so spoke because her ideas were associated with 
mutton and that by allowing me to cook her room would not 
be spoiled as I simply wanted to prepare porridge or boil the 
milk and I told her also that, if her carpet was spoiled, I would 
pay for the spoiling. She after some hesitation accepted my propo-
sal and I took her room up for 8s per week. 
After leaving 
my luggage in the room, I went out in search of the vegetarian 
restaurant. I could not find it. And I thought my experiment 
would fail. This gloomy outlook was rendered gloomier still when 
I found that no restaurant-keeper would arrange to provide me a 
dinner consisting of vegetable soup, and bread and butter for 
one shilling. All thought they could not undergo the bother for 
one man. I thought the task was hopeless and that I would be 
obliged to pay 2s or 3s merely for a dinner. 
I was quite tired 
by this time and very hungry, but I did not give up. I knew that 
I was to take rest and was not to read much during my stay in 
Brighton. So I said to myself that if I should cook two meals, why 
not cook three? As soon as the idea flashed in my mind, I caught 
hold of it, went to a grocer's, bought the necessary things and 
went to my place. 
On reaching the house, I told the landlady that, although 
the arrangement was to allow me to cook only two meals, I would 
have to cook three. She was angry and would have driven me out of 
the house, had I not offered to raise the rent from 8 to 10 s. I then 
set about to work. The first evening I prepared porridge and stewed 
fruit and I liked it very much. The next morning I had the same. 
For dinner I had haricot soup which proved to be very 
nourishing and nice. I thus arranged my meals for the [four] weeks. 
For breakfast I had bread and milk and stewed fruit and bread 
and butter (3d), for dinner I had soup (1½), strawberries (2d) 
and bread (1d). For supper I had porridge (1½), bread and butter 
and fruit (2). Thus I spent only 11 d or 1 shilling per day at the 
most for food in Brighton. With the 10 s rent, 3 shillings for 
washing, the whole expenses for board and lodging for four weeks 
amounted to £3-10-0. 
And it cost me £4-8-5 for fares to and 
from Brighton. Thus I was able for four pounds to go to live for 
four weeks in and return from Brighton. 
I found out during the last week of my stay in Brighton that 
there was a vegetarian home where I could have got board and 
lodging for 14s per week. 
The house is situated near the Preston 
120 
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI 
Park. 
The weekly rent was 5s breakfast 4d, dinner 9d, and 
supper 4d. Had I found the house a little earlier, I could have 
lived in Brighton yet more cheaply and more comfortably; but 
I would not have learnt how to cook with facility. 
There is also 
another vegetarian house in Brighton where they charge 18s per 
week for board and lodging. 
It may be said that the cooking did not take much time. The 
breakfast took only 10 minutes to be ready. For there was only 
milk to be made hot. The supper took nearly 20 minutes and the 
dinner 1 hour. Thus encouraged by success on reaching London, 
the first thing for me to do was to go on in search of a sui-
table bed-sitting room. 
I selected a room in Tavistock Street 
for 8s a week. 
Here I cooked my breakfast and supper and 
dined outside. The landlady supplied me with plates, spoons and 
knife, etc. The breakfast almost always consisted of porridge, 
stewed fruit and bread and butter (3d). I dined for 6d at one of 
the many vegetarian restaurants and for supper I had bread and 
milk and some stewed fruit or radishes or fresh fruit (3d); so then 
the expenses for board and lodging in England were, during the 
last 9 months of my stay, only 15s and even 14s latterly when, 
in the same house, I took up a 7-s room. During this time I en-
joyed the best of health and had to work very hard, if not the 
hardest, as there were only 5 months left for the final examination. 
I used to walk about 8 miles every day and in all I had 
three walks daily, one in the evening at 5.30 p.m. for an hour 
and the other always for 30 or 45 minutes before going to bed. I 
never suffered from ill health except once when I suffered from 
bronchitis owing to over-work and neglect of exercise. I got rid 
of it without having to take any medicine. The good health I en-
joyed is attributable only to vegetable diet and exercise in the 
open air. Even the coldest weather or the densest fog did not 
prevent me from having my usual walks. 
And under the advice 
of Dr. Allinson, the champion of open air, I used to keep my 
bedroom windows open about 4 inches in all weathers. This is not 
generally done by people in winter, but it seems to be very desi-
rable. At any rate it agreed with me very well. 
From the typescript. Courtesy: Pyarelal Nayyar 
