32. 
AN EXPERIMENT IN VITAL FOOD 
Before describing the experiment, if it may be called one, 
I would mention that I gave the vital food a trial in Bombay 
for a week; that I left it off only because at the time I had to enter-
tain many friends, and because there were some other 
social 
considerations; that the vital food agreed with me very well then; 
and that, had I been able to continue it, very likely it would have 
suited me. 
I give the notes as I took them while I was conducting the 
experiment. 
August 22nd, 1893. Began the vital food experiment. I have 
been having a cold for the last two days, with a slight cold in the 
ears too. 
Had two tablespoonfuls of wheat, one of peas, one of 
rice, two of sultanas, about twenty small nuts, two oranges, and a 
cup of cocoa for breakfast. The pulses and cereals were soaked 
overnight. I finished the meal in 45 minutes. Was very bright in 
the morning, depression came on in the evening, with a slight 
headache. For dinner had the usual things—bread, vegetables, etc. 
August 23rd. Feeling hungry, had some peas last evening. 
Owing to that I did not sleep well, and woke up with a bad 
taste in the mouth in the morning. Had the same breakfast and 
dinner as yesterday. Though the day was very dull and it rained 
a little, I had no headache or cold. Had tea with Baker1. This did 
not agree at all. Felt pains in the stomach. 
August 24th. In the morning woke up uneasy, with a heavy 
stomach. Had the same breakfast, except that the one spoonful of 
peas was reduced to half. The usual dinner. Did not feel well. Had 
feeling of indigestion the whole day. 
August 25th. Felt a heaviness in the stomach when I got 
up. During the day, too, did not feel well. Had no appetite for 
dinner. Still I had it. There were undercooked peas for dinner 
yesterday. That may have to do with the heaviness. Got head-
ache in the latter part of the day. Took some quinine after dinner. 
The same breakfast as yesterday. 
August 26th. Rose up with a heavy stomach. For breakfast I 
had half a tablespoonful of peas, half of rice, half of wheat, two and 
1 A. W. Baker, attorney and preacher, who discussed Christianity with 
Gandhiji and introduced him to Christian friends in Pretoria 
122 
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI 
a half of sultanas, ten walnuts, and one orange. The mouth did not 
taste well throughout the day. Did not feel well either. Had the 
usual dinner. At 7 p.m. had an orange and a cup of cocoa. I feel 
hungry (8 p.m.), and yet no desire to eat. The vital food does not 
seem to agree well. 
August 27th. In the morning got up very hungry, but did not 
feel well. For breakfast had one-and-a-half tablespoonfuls of wheat, 
two of raisins, ten walnuts and an orange (mark, no peas and 
rice). Towards the latter part of the day felt better. The cause of 
yesterday's heaviness was perhaps peas and rice. At 1 p.m. had 
one teaspoonful of unsoaked wheat, one tablespoonful of raisins, 
and fourteen nuts (thus, the usual dinner was replaced by vital 
food). At Miss Harris's had tea (bread, butter, jam and cocoa). 
I enjoyed the tea very much and felt as if I was having bread 
and butter after a long fast. After tea felt very hungry and weak. 
Had, therefore, a cup of cocoa and an orange on returning home. 
August 28th. In the morning the mouth did not taste well. Had 
one and a half tablespoonfuls of wheat, two of raisins, twenty 
nuts, one orange and a cup of cocoa; except that I felt weak and 
hungry I felt all right. The mouth, too, was all right. 
August 29th. Woke up well in the morning. For breakfast had 
one-and-a-half tablespoonfuls of wheat, two of sultanas, one orange 
and twenty nuts. For dinner had three tablespoonfuls of wheat, 
two of currants and twenty nuts and two oranges. In the evening 
had rice, vermicelli and potatoes at Tyab's. Felt weak towards 
evening. 
August 30th. For breakfast had two tablespoonfuls of wheat, 
two of raisins, twenty walnuts, and one orange. 
For dinner had 
the same things, with an addition of one more orange. Felt very 
weak. Could not take the usual walks without fatigue. 
August 31st. When I got up in the morning the mouth was 
very sweet. Felt very weak. Had the same quantity of food both for 
breakfast and dinner. Had a cup of cocoa and an orange in the 
evening. Felt extremely weak throughout the day. I can take the 
walks with much difficulty. The teeth, too, are getting weaker, the 
mouth too sweet. 
September 1st. Got up in the morning quite tired. Had the 
same breakfast as yesterday, the same dinner. Feel very weak; 
teeth are aching. The experiment must be left off. Had tea with 
Baker as it was his birthday. Felt better after the tea. 
September 2nd. Woke up fresh in the morning (the effect of last 
evening's tea). Had the old food (porridge, bread, butter, jam 
and cocoa). Felt ever so much better. 
AN EXPERIMENT IN VITAL FOOD 
123 
Thus ended the vital food experiment. 
Under more favourable circumstances it might not 
have 
failed. A boarding-house, where one cannot control everything, 
where it is not possible to make frequent changes in the diet, is 
hardly a place where food experiments can be conducted success-
fully. Again, it will have been noticed that the only fresh fruit 
that I could get was oranges. No other fruits were to be had in 
the Transvaal then. 
It is a matter of great regret that, although the Transvaal soil 
is very fruitful, the fruit cultivation is very much neglected. Again, 
I could not get any milk, which is a very dear commodity here. 
People generally use condensed milk in South Africa. It must, 
therefore, be admitted that the experiment is entirely useless to 
prove the value of vital food. It were sheer audacity to venture 
any opinion on the vital food after an eleven days' trial under 
adverse circumstances. To expect the stomach, used for twenty 
years and upwards to cooked food, to assimilate, at a stroke, un-
cooked food, is too much, and yet I think the experiment has its 
value. It should serve as a guide to others, who would embark 
upon such experiments, attracted to them by some of their 
charms, but have not the ability, or the means, or the circumstan-
ces, or the patience, or the knowledge to carry them to a success-
ful issue. I confess I had none of the above qualifications. 
Having 
no patience to watch the results slowly, I violently changed my diet. 
From the very start, the breakfast consisted of the vital food, while 
four or five days had hardly passed when the dinner, too, consisted 
of vital food. My acquaintance with the vital food theory was very 
superficial indeed. A little pamphlet by Mr. Hills, and one or 
two articles that recently appeared from his pen in The Vegetarian 
were all I knew about it. Anyone, therefore, not possessing the 
necessary qualifications, is, I believe, doomed to failure, and will 
hurt both himself and the cause he is trying to investigate into 
and advance. 
And after all, is it worth while for an ordinary vegetarian 
to devote his attention to such pursuits—a vegetarian who enjoys 
good health and is satisfied with his diet? 
Would it not be better 
to leave it to the adepts who devote their lives to such researches? 
These remarks apply especially to those vegetarians who base their 
creed on the grand basis of humanitarianism—who are vegetarians 
because they consider it wrong, nay, even sinful, to kill animals 
for their food. 
That the ordinary vegetarianism is possible, is 
conducive to health, he who runs may see. What more, then, do 
we want? Vital food may have its grand possibilities in store; 
124 
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI 
but it will surely not make our perishable bodies immortal. That 
any considerable majority of human beings would ever do away 
with cooking does not seem feasible. The vital food will not, can-
not, as such, minister to the wants of the soul. And if the highest 
aim, indeed, the only aim of this life, be to know the soul, then, 
it is humbly submitted, anything that takes away from our opportu-
nities of knowing the soul, and therefore, also playing with the 
vital food and other such experiments, is playing away, to that ex-
tent, the only desirable aim in life. 
If we are to eat that we may live to the glory of Him, of whom 
we are, then, is it not sufficient that we eat nothing that, to 
Nature, is repulsive, that requires the unnecessary spilling of 
blood? No more, however, of this while I am yet on the thres-
hold of my studies in that direction. 
I simply throw out these 
thoughts, which were passing through the mind while I was con-
ducting the experiment, so that some dear brother or sister may 
find, perchance, an echo of their own in this. 
The reasons which led me to try the vital food were its extreme 
simplicity. That I could dispense with cooking, that I could carry 
about my own food wherever I went, that I should not have to put 
up with any uncleanness of the landlady or those who supplied 
me with food, that, in travelling in such countries as South Africa, 
the vital food would be an ideal food, were charms too irresistible 
for me. But what a sacrifice of time and trouble to achieve what is 
after all a selfish end, which falls short of the highest! Life seems 
too short for these things. 
The Vegetarian, 24-3-1894 
