33. LETTER TO "THE VEGETARIAN"1 
[PRETORIA] 
TO 
THE EDITOR 
The Vegetarian 
MY DEAR BROTHER, 
If you are a vegetarian, I think it is your duty to join the 
London Vegetarian Society, and to subscribe to The Vegetarian if 
you have not done so already. 
It is your duty because—
(1) You will thereby encourage and aid the creed you pro-
fess. 
(2) That will be an expression of the bond of sympathy that 
should exist between a vegetarian and a vegetarian in a land 
where there are so few of them. 
(3) The vegetarian movement will indirectly aid India poli-
tically also, inasmuch as the English vegetarians will more readily 
sympathize with the Indian aspirations (that is my personal expe-
rience). 
(4) Looking at the question even from a purely selfish point 
of view, you will thereby be able to have a large circle of vege-
tarian friends who ought to be more acceptable than others. 
(5) Your knowledge of the vegetarian literature will enable 
you to remain firm in your principles in a land where you are 
exposed to so many temptations, which have in very many cases 
proved irresistible, and you will, in case of illness, be able to get 
the aid of vegetarian doctors and drugs, whom and which you will 
know very easily, having joined the Society and subscribed to its 
paper. 
(6) That will help your fellow-brothers in India a great deal, 
and be also a means of dispelling the doubt that still lingers in the 
minds of our parents as to the possibility of existence under a vege-
1 This was published along with the note reading: "Mr. M. K. Gandhi 
has sent round the following letter to the Indians in England and we repro-
duce it here to show what active work is still being done in our midst by 
Mr. Gandhi, in spite of the distance which separates him from us. And yet our 
opponents say that vegetarian Indians have no persistence of purpose like the 
sons of "Honest John Bull"! Ed., Veg." 
126 
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI 
tarian diet, and thus facilitate the way of other Indians to visit 
England a great deal. 
(7) If there were a sufficient number of Indian subscribers, 
the Editor of The Vegetarian may be induced to devote a page or a 
column to India, which, you will admit, cannot but result in bene-
fit to India. 
Many more reasons can be given to show why you should 
join the Society and subscribe to The Vegetarian, but I hope these 
will be sufficient to induce you to view my proposal with favour. 
Even if you are not a vegetarian, you will find that many of 
the above reasons will apply to you also, and you can sub-
scribe to The Vegetarian, and who knows but you may, in the end, 
consider it a privilege to join the rank of those who never depend 
for their existence on the blood of their fellow-creatures. 
Of course, there is also the Manchester Vegetarian Society 
and its organ The Vegetarian Messenger. I have pleaded for the 
L.V.S. and its organ simply because it is so very handy, being 
in London, and because its organ is weekly. 
I do trust that you will not excuse yourself from joining and 
subscribing on the score of economy, for the subscription is so small, 
and it is sure to more than repay your money. 
Hoping you will not consider this an impertinence on my part. 
Yours in brotherly love, 
M. 
K. 
GANDHI 
The Vegetarian, 28-4-1894 
