35. 
QUESTIONS ON RELIGION1 
[PRETORIA, 
Before June, 1894] 
What is the Soul? Does it perform actions? Do past actions 
impede its progress or not? 
What is God? Is He the Creator of the universe? 
What is moksha2? 
Is it possible for a person to know for certain, while he is still 
living, whether or not he will attain moksha? 
It is said that after his death, a man may, according to his 
actions, be reborn as an animal, a tree, or even a stone. Is that 
so? 
What is Arya Dharma? 
Do all Indian religions originate from 
the Vedas? 
Who composed the Vedas? Are they anadi 3? If so, what does 
anadi mean? 
Who is the author of the Gita? 
Is God its author? Is there 
any evidence that He is? 
Does any merit accrue from the sacrifice of animals and other 
things? 
If a claim is put forward that a particular religion is the best, 
may we not ask the claimant for proof? 
1 Gandhiji put Raychandbhai some questions in a letter written some-
time before June 1894. The original being untraceable the questions have been 
extracted from Raychandbhai's reply. 
The source indicates that a few more 
questions asked were omitted and hence their text is not available. 
For 
Raychandbhai's answers, vide Vol. XXXII, Appendix I; also An Autobiography, 
Pt. II, Ch. I. 
2 The supreme goal of spiritual life, liberation from phenomenal exis-
tence 
3 Without origin or beginning 
128 
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI 
Do you know anything about Christianity? If so, what do 
you think of it ? 
The Christians hold that the Bible is divinely inspired and 
that Christ was an incarnation of God, being His son. Was He? 
Were all the Old Testament prophecies fulfilled in Christ? 
Can anyone remember his past lives or have an idea of his 
future lives? 
If yes, who can? 
You have given the names of some who have attained moksha. 
What is the authority for this statement? 
What makes you say that even Buddha did not attain moksha ? 
What will finally happen to this world? 
Will the world be morally better off in the future? 
Is there anything like total destruction of the world? 
Can an illiterate person attain moksha by bhakti alone? 
Rama and Krishna are described as incarnations of God. 
What does that mean? Were they God Himself or only a part of 
Him? Can we attain salvation through faith in them? 
Who were Brahma, Vishnu and Siva? 
If a snake is about to bite me, should I allow myself to be 
bitten or should I kill it, supposing that that is the only way in 
which I can save myself? 
[From Gujarati] 
Shrimad Rajachandra, pp. 292 et seq. 
