36. PETITION TO NATAL LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY1 
DURBAN, 
June 28, 1894 
TO 
THE HONOURABLE 
THE 
SPEAKER 
AND 
MEMBERS 
OF 
THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF THE COLONY OF NATAL 
THE PETITION OF THE INDIANS RESIDENT IN 
THE COLONY OF NATAL 
HUMBLY SHEWETH THAT: 
1. Your Petitioners are British subjects, who have come 
from India and settled in the Colony. 
1 First it was addressed to both the Council and the Assembly. 
Then 
it was amended and addressed only to the Assembly, and a separate petition 
was addressed to the Council; vide "Petition to Natal Legislative Council", 
4-7-1894. 
PETITION TO NATAL LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY 
129 
2. Your Petitioners are many of them registered as electors 
duly qualified to vote at the election of members to your Honour-
able Council and Assembly. 
3. Your Petitioners have read with feelings of unfeigned 
regret and alarm the debate as reported in the newspapers on the 
second reading of the Franchise Law Amendment Bill. 
4. Your Petitioners, with the greatest 
deference to 
your 
Honourable House, beg to dissent entirely from the views of the 
various speakers, and feel constrained to say that the real facts fail 
to support the reasons adduced in justification of the passing of 
the unfortunate measure. 
5. The reasons, as reported in the newspapers, brought for-
ward in support of the measure, your Petitioners understand, are: 
(a) that the Indians have never exercised the franchise 
in the land they come from; 
(b) that they are not fit for the exercise of the franchise. 
6. Your Petitioners respectfully beg to press on the notice of 
the Honourable Members that all the facts and history point the 
other way. 
7. The Indian nation has known, and has exercised, the 
power of election from times far prior to the time when the Anglo-
Saxon races first became acquainted with the principles of re-
presentation. 
8. In support of the above, your Petitioners beg to draw the 
attention of your Honourable Assembly to Sir Henry Sumner 
Maine's1 
Village Communities, where he has most clearly pointed 
out that the Indian races have been familiar with representative 
institutions almost from time immemorial. 
That eminent lawyer 
and writer has shown that the Teutonic Mark was hardly so well 
organized or so essentially representative as an Indian village com-
munity until the precise technical Roman form was engrafted 
upon it. 
9. 
Mr. Chisolm Anstey2, in a speech delivered before the East 
India Association in London, said: 
We are apt to forget in this country, when we talk of preparing 
people in the East by education and all that sort of thing for Muni-
cipal Government and Parliamentary Government, that the East is the 
parent of Municipalities. Local Self-government, in the widest acceptation 
1 1822-88; eminent jurist whose works include Ancient Law and Early 
History of Institutions. He was a member of the India Council, 1862-69 and 
1871. 
2 1816-73; lawyer and politician; Member of Parliament, 1847-52 
I-9 
130 
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI 
of the term, is as old as the East itself. 
No matter what may be the 
religion of the people who inhabit what we call the East, there is not 
a portion of the country from East to West, from North to South, which 
is not swarming with municipalities; and not only so, but, like to our 
municipalities of old, they are all bound together as in a species of net-
work, so that you have, ready-made to your hand, the framework of 
the great system of representation. 
Every caste in every village or town has its own rules or regu-
lations, and elects representatives, and furnishes an exact proto-
type of the Saxon Witans, from which have sprung the present 
Parliamentary institutions. 
10. The word Panchayat is a household word throughout the 
length and breadth of India, and it means, as the Honourable 
Members may be well aware, a Council of Five elected by the class 
of the people to whom the five belong, for the purpose of mana-
ging and controlling the social affairs of the particular caste. 
11. The State of Mysore has at the present moment a re-
presentative parliament, called the Mysore Assembly, on the exact 
model of the British Parliament. 
12. The trading Indian community now residing in Dur-
ban have their Panchayat, or Council of Five, and in case of matters 
of pressing importance their deliberations are controlled by the 
community at large, who can, according to the constitution of the 
body, overrule their decisions by a sufficient majority. Here is, 
your Memorialists submit, a proof of their capabilities as regards 
representation. 
13. Indeed, so much has the Indians' ability to understand 
representative institutions been recognized by Her Majesty's Gov-
ernment that India enjoys municipal local self-government in the 
truest sense of the term. 
14. There were, in 1891, 755 municipalities and 892 local 
boards in India, with 20,000 Indian members. 
This would give 
some idea of the magnitude of the municipalities and the electo-
rate. 
15. If further proof be needed on this head, 
your Peti-
tioners draw the Honourable Members' attention to the recently 
passed India Councils Bill, whereby the system of representation 
has been introduced even into the Legislative Councils of the various 
Presidencies of India. 
16. Your Honourable Assembly will, your Petitioners trust, 
see, therefore, that the exercise of the franchise by them is no exten-
sion of a new privilege they have never before known or enjoyed, 
PETITION TO NATAL LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY 
131 
but on the contrary, the disqualification to exercise it would be an 
unjust restriction which, under similar circumstances, would never 
be put on them in the land of their birth. 
17. Hence, also, your Petitioners submit that the fear that 
they may, if they were allowed to exercise the privilege of fran-
chise, "become propagandists of agitation and instruments of sedi-
tion in that great country they come from", is, to say the least of 
it, without ground. 
18. Your Petitioners deem it unnecessary to dwell upon 
the minor points and the needlessly harsh remarks made in the 
course of the debate on the second reading. They would, however, 
crave leave to give some extracts which bear on the subject under 
consideration. Your Petitioners would rather have been judged by 
their works than have sought to justify themselves by quoting what 
others have thought of their race; but, under the present circum-
stances, they have no other course left open to them, since, owing 
to want of free intercourse, there seems to prevail much misunder-
standing about their capabilities. 
19. Speaking at a meeting at the Assembly Rooms, Ken-
nington, Mr. F. Pincott said: 
We have heard a great deal in this country about the ignorance of the 
Indian people and their unfitness for appreciating the great advantages of 
representative government. 
All that is really very foolish, because repre-
sentative government has nothing to do with education. 
It has a great 
deal to do with common sense, and the people of India are gifted with 
as much common sense, as we have; we exercised the right of election 
and we had representative institutions many hundreds of years before we 
possessed any education whatever. 
Therefore, the educational test goes 
simply for naught. 
Those who know the history of our country know 
very well that two hundred years ago the grossest superstition and igno-
rance prevailed, and yet we had our representative institutions. 
20. Sir George Birdwood1, writing on the general character of 
the people of India, thus sums up: 
The people of India are in no intrinsic sense our inferiors, while in things 
measured by some of the false standards, false to ourselves, we pretend to 
believe in, they are our superiors. 
21. Says 
Sir Thomas Munro, one of the Governors of 
Madras: 
1 1832-1917; served in the Bombay Medical Service in 1854, and later 
for thirty years in the India Office, London. 
Author of Report on the Miscel-
laneous Old Records of the India Office and The Industrial Arts of India. 
132 
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI 
I do not know what is meant by civilizing the people of India. 
In 
the theory and practice of good government they may be deficient; but if 
a good system of agriculture, if unrivalled manufacture ... if the estab-
lishment of schools for reading and writing, if the general practice of kind-
ness and hospitality ... are amongst the points that denote a civilized 
people, then they are not inferior in civilization to the people of Europe. 
22. Professor Max Muller thus speaks of the much abused and 
more misunderstood Indian: 
If I were asked under what sky the human mind has most fully developed 
some of its choicest gifts, has most deeply pondered on the greatest problem 
of life, and has found solutions of some of them which well deserve the 
attention even of those who have studied Plato and Kant, I should point 
to India. 
23. To appeal to the finer feelings, your Petitioners respect-
fully venture to point out that the Franchise Law Amendment 
Bill, if passed, would have a tendency to retard, instead of hasten-
ing, the process of unification the flower of the British and the 
Indian nations are earnestly striving for. 
24. Your Petitioners have purposely let the English autho-
rities speak on their behalf, without any comments to amplify the 
above extracts. It is yet possible to multiply such extracts, but your 
Petitioners confidently trust that the above will prove sufficient 
to convince your Honourable Assembly of the justice of their 
prayer, and they earnestly beseech your Honourable Assembly 
to reconsider your decision; or to appoint a Commission to enquire 
into the question as to whether the Indians resident in the Colony 
are fit to exercise the privilege of franchise, before proceeding fur-
ther with the Bill. 
And for this act of justice and mercy, your Petitioners, as in 
duty bound, shall for ever pray, etc., etc. 
Colonial Office Records, No. 179, Vol. 189: Votes and Proceedings of 
Parliament, Natal, 1894 
