37. 
DEPUTATION TO NATAL PREMIER1 
DURBAN, 
June 29, 1894 
TO 
SIR JOHN ROBINSON, K.C.M.G. 
PREMIER AND COLONIAL SECRETARY 
COLONY OF NATAL 
MAY IT PLEASE YOUR HONOUR, 
We have to thank Your Honour very much for sparing some 
of Your Honour's valuable time to receive this deputation. 
We beg to present this petition of the Indians residing in the 
Colony to Your Honour and beg you to give it Your Honour's 
earnest attention. 
We would not trespass longer on Your Honour's courtesy than 
is absolutely necessary. We, however, regret that we have not at our 
disposal time enough to lay our case as thoroughly as possible 
before Your Honour. 
Sir, we have been taunted with having woke up almost too 
late. It is only necessary to put before you the peculiar circum-
stances to convince Your Honour that we could not possibly have 
approached the Honourable Houses earlier. The two chief lead-
ing members of the community were away from the Colony on 
urgent business and were shut out from all communication with 
people in the Colony. Our very imperfect knowledge of the Eng-
lish language materially prevents us from keeping ourselves in 
touch with important matters as we should like to be. 
With greatest respect to Your Honour, we beg to point out 
that both the Anglo-Saxon and the Indian races belong to the 
same stock. We read Your Honour's eloquent speech at the time 
of the second reading of the Bill with rapt attention and took great 
pains to ascertain if any writer of authority gave countenance to 
the view expressed by Your Honour about the difference of the 
stocks from which both the races have sprung up. Max Muller, 
Morris, Greene and a host of other writers with one voice seem to 
show very clearly that both the races have sprung from the same 
Aryan stock, or rather the Indo-European as many call it. We have 
no wish whatever to thrust ourselves as members of a brother 
1 Enclosure No. 1 in Schedule of Correspondence published by order of 
the Legislative Assembly of Natal on April 21, 1896 
134 
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI 
nation on a nation that would be unwilling to receive us as such, 
but we may be pardoned if we state the real facts, the alleged 
absence of which has been put forward as an argument to pro-
nounce us as unfit for the exercise of the franchise. 
Your Honour has, moreover, been reported to have said that it 
would be cruel to expect Indians to exercise the privilege of franchise. 
We humbly submit that our petition is a sufficient answer to this. 
It has given us no small satisfaction to know that, however 
unjust Your Honour's speech may have appeared to us from our 
point of view, it breathed truest sentiments of justice, morality 
and, what is more, Christianity. So long as such a spirit is notice-
able among the chosen of the land, we would never despair of 
right being done in every case. 
It is therefore that we have ventured to approach Your 
Honour, fully believing that, in the light of the new facts disclosed 
by our humble petition, a display of the same sentiments will result 
in substantial justice being done to the Indians in the Colony. 
We believe that the prayer of the petition is very modest. If 
the newspaper reports are trustworthy, Your Honour was pleased 
to acknowledge that there were some respectable Indians who were 
intelligent enough to exercise the precious privilege. That alone, 
in our humble opinion, is a sufficient reason for granting a Com-
mission of enquiry into the momentous question. We are willing 
to face, nay, we court such a Commission, and, will it be asking 
too much if we ask that the Indians should be allowed to exercise 
the privilege, if the impartial judgment of an impartial Commis-
sion pronounced the Indians fit for such an exercise? If we have 
understood the Bill rightly, the Indians would, in the event of its 
becoming law, rank lower than the lowest native. For, while the 
latter can educate himself into fitness for the power of election, 
the former never can. The Bill seems to be so sweeping that even 
the Indian Member of the British House of Commons, did he come 
here, would not be fit for becoming a voter. 
Did we not know that other matters of equal importance 
seriously engage Your Honour's attention, we could go on showing 
the injurious consequences that would flow from the interpretation 
of the Bill, consequences perhaps never contemplated by its illus-
trious authors. If we were given a week's time we could put our 
case more exhaustively before the House of Assembly. We would 
then leave our cause in Your Honour's hands, imploring Your 
Honour with all the earnestness at our command to use Your 
Honour's powerful influence and to see that full justice is done to 
the Indians. For it is justice we want and that only. 
A CIRCULAR LETTER TO LEGISLATORS 
135 
We thank Your Honour for receiving this deputation and the 
patience and courtesy shown to us. 
We beg to subscribe ourselves on behalf of the Indian com-
munity, 
Your Honour's obedient servants, 
M. K. GANDHI 
AND THREE OTHERS 
Colonial Office Records No. 181, Vol. 41 
