4. 
LONDON DIARY1 
LONDON, 
November 12, 1888 
What led to the intention of proceeding to London? 
The 
scene opens 
about 
the 
end of April. Before the intention of 
coming to London for the sake of study was actually formed, 
I 
had a secret design in my mind of coming here to satisfy my 
1 When his nephew and co-worker, Chhaganlal Gandhi, was proceeding 
for the first time to London in 1909, Gandhiji gave him his "London Diary". 
The diary filled about 120 pages. 
Chhaganlal Gandhi gave it to Mahadev 
Desai in 1920. 
But, before doing so, he copied out in a notebook about 20 
pages of the original. 
The remaining 100 pages were not continuous writing, 
but merely a chronicle of incidents during his stay in London from 1888 to 
1891. 
The original being untraceable, Chhaganlal's copy is reproduced here 
with minimum editing. 
Gandhiji wrote the diary in English when he was 19. 
LONDON DIARY 
3 
curiosity of knowing what London was. While I was prosecuting 
my college studies in Bhavnagar1, I had a chat with Jayshankar 
Buch. During the chat he advised me to apply to the Juna-
gadh2 State to give me a scholarship to proceed to London, I be-
ing an inhabitant of Sorath3. I do not perfectly remember the 
answer I made to him that day, I suppose I felt the impossibility 
of getting the scholarship. From that [time] I had in my mind 
the intention of visiting the land. 
I was finding the means to 
reach that end. 
On 13th April, 1888, I left Bhavnagar to enjoy the vacation in 
Rajkot. After 15 days of vacation, my elder brother and I went 
to see Patwari. On our return my brother said: "We would go 
to see Mavji Joshi4", and so we went. Mavji Joshi asked me as 
usual how I did. 
Then put some questions about my study in 
Bhavnagar. 
I plainly told him that I had hardly any chance of 
passing my examination first year. 
I also added that I found 
the course very difficult. Hearing this, he advised my brother to 
send me as soon as possible to London for being called to the Bar. 
He said the expense will be only Rs. 5,000. "Let him take some 
udad dal. There he will cook some food for himself and thereby 
there will be no objection about religion. Don't reveal the matter 
to anybody. Try to get some scholarship. 
Apply to Junagadh 
and Porbandar States. 
See my son Kevalram5, and if you fail in 
getting the pecuniary help and if you have no money, sell your 
furniture. But anyhow send Mohandas to London. I think that 
is the only means to keep the reputation of your deceased father." 
All of our family members have great faith in what Mavji Joshi 
says. And my brother who is naturally very credulous made a pro-
mise to Mavji Joshi to send me to London. Now was the time for 
my exertions. 
On that very day my brother, notwithstanding his promise 
to keep the matter secret, told the thing to Khushalbhai6. He, 
of course, approved of it in case I could observe my religion. 
The very day it was told to Meghjibhai7. He quite agreed with 
the proposal and offered to give me Rs. 5,000. I had some faith 
in what he said. And when the matter was disclosed to my dear 
1 & 2 Former princely States in Gujarat 
3 A district in Saurashtra 
4 Priest, family friend and adviser of the Gandhis 
5 Leading lawyer of Kathiawar 
6 Gandhiji's cousin 
and father of Chhaganlal and Maganlal both of 
whom worked with him in South Africa 
7 Gandhiji's cousin 
4 
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI 
mother, she reproached me for being so credulous and she said 
I would never get any money from him when the time comes, 
which she thought never will come. 
On that day I was to (go to) Kevalrambhai. I saw him ac-
cordingly. There I had not a satisfactory chat. He no doubt ap-
proved of my object but said: "You will have to spend there at 
least Rs. 10,000." 
This was a great blow to me, and again he said: 
"You will have to set aside all your religious prejudices, if any. 
You will have to eat meat, you must drink. You cannot live with-
out that. The more you spend, the cleverer you will be. It is a 
very important thing. I speak to you frankly. Don't be offended; 
but, look here, you are still very young. There are many tempta-
tions in London. You are apt to be entrapped by them." 
I 
was partially dejected by this talk. But I am not a man who would, 
after having formed any intention, leave it easily. He illustrated 
his statement by giving example of Mr. Gulam Mahomed Munshi. 
I asked him whether he could help me in any way in getting the 
scholarship. He answered in the negative. He said he would very 
gladly do anything except that. I told everything to my brother. 
Then I was entrusted with the business of receiving the con-
sent of my dear mother, which I thought was not an arduous task 
for me. After a day or two, my brother and I went to see Mr. 
Kevalram; there he saw us though he was very busy at that time. 
We had a talk of the similar kind that I had with him a day or 
two earlier. He advised my brother to send me to Porbandar. The 
proposal was agreed to. Then we returned. I began to introduce 
the subject to my mother in joke. The joke was turned to reality 
in no time. Then a day was fixed for my going to Porbandar. 
Twice or thrice I prepared to go, but some difficulty came in 
my way. Once I was to go with Zaverchand, but an hour before 
the time of my departure a serious accident took place. I was 
always quarrelling with my friend Sheikh Mehtab1. On the day of 
departure I was quite engrossed in thinking about the quarrel. He 
had a musical party at night. I did not enjoy it very well. At 
about 10.30 p.m. the party ended and we all went to see Meghji-
bhai and Rami. On our way I was buried in the madcap thoughts 
of London on one side and the thoughts of Sheikh Mehtab on the 
other. Amidst thoughts, I came unconsciously in contact with a 
carriage. I received some injury. Yet I did not take the help of 
anybody in walking. I think I was quite dizzy. Then we entered 
1 Boyhood friend of Gandhiji whom he tried for several years to reform, 
but without success 
LONDON DIARY 
5 
the house of Meghjibhai. There I again came in contact with a 
stone unknowingly and received injury. 
I was quite senseless. 
From that [time] I did not know what took place, and after that, 
I am told by them, I fell flat on the ground after some steps. I 
was not myself for 5 minutes. They considered I was dead. But 
fortunately for myself the ground on which I fell was quite 
smooth. 
I came to my senses at last and all of them were quite 
joyful. The mother was sent for. 
She was very sorry for me, and 
this caused my delay though I told them that I was quite well. 
But none would allow me to go, though I afterwards came to 
know that my bold and dearest mother would have allowed me 
to go. But she feared the calumny of other people. 
At last with 
great difficulty I was allowed to leave Rajkot for Porbandar after 
some days. On my way too I had to encounter some difficulties. 
At length I reached Porbandar to the joy of all. 
Lalbhai1 
and Karsondas2 had come to the Khadi bridge to fetch me home. 
Now what had I to do in Porbandar [was to] exact consent from 
my uncle, and, secondly apply to Mr. Lely3 to render me some 
pecuniary help, and last, in case of failure to get the State scholar-
ship, to ask Parmanandbhai4 to give me some money. The first 
thing I did was that I saw uncle and asked him whether he liked 
my going to London or not. Then, naturally, as I had expected, 
he asked me to enumerate the advantages of going to London. 
This I did according to my power. Then he said: "Of course, the 
people of this generation would like it very much, but, as for my-
self, I do not like it. Nevertheless we shall consider afterwards." I 
was not disappointed by such an answer. At least I had the satis-
faction to know that at all events he liked it inwardly and his 
deed proved what I thought right. 
Unfortunately for me, Mr. Lely was not in Porbandar. It is 
quite true that misfortunes never come single. After his return from 
the district where he had gone, he was to go at once on leave. 
My uncle advised me to wait for him till the next Sunday. And if 
he did not come up during that time, he said, he would send 
me where he should be. But it gives me much pleasure to write 
here that he returned from the district on Sunday. Then it was 
settled that I should see him on Monday. It was done accor-
dingly. 
For the first time in my life I had an interview with an 
English gentleman. Formerly I never dared to front them. But 
1 Gandhiji's cousin 
2 Gandhiji's elder brother 
3 British Agent in Porbandar State during the minority of the Prince 
4 Gandhiji's cousin 
6 
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI 
thoughts of London made me bold. 
I had small talk with him 
in Gujarati. He was quite in a hurry. 
He saw me when he was 
ascending the ladder of the upper storey of his bungalow. He said 
the Porbandar State was very poor and could not give me any 
pecuniary help. However, he said, I should first graduate in 
India and then he would see if he could render me any help. In-
deed such an answer from him quite disappointed me. I did not 
expect such a reply from him. 
Now what I had to do was to ask Parmanandbhai to give 
me Rs. 5,000. 
He said he would very gladly give them if my 
uncle approved of my going to London. 
I thought this to be 
rather a difficult task, yet I was determined upon exacting his 
consent. I saw him when he was busy doing something, and ad-
dressed him thus: "Uncle, now tell me what you really think of 
my going. My chief aim in coming here is to exact your con-
sent." Then he replied: "I cannot approve of it. Don't you know 
that I am going on a pilgrimage, and is it not disgraceful on my 
part to say that I like that people should go to London? How-
ever, if your mother and brother like it, I do not at all object to 
it." "But then," I said, "you don't know that you prevent Parma-
nandbhai from rendering me pecuniary help by refusing to allow 
my going to London." Just as I uttered these words, he said 
in an angry tone: 
"Is it so? 
My dear chap, you don't know 
why he says so. 
He knows that I will never approve of your go-
ing and so he brings forth this excuse. But the real thing is that 
he is never to render you any help of the kind. I do not prevent 
him from doing so." Thus ended our talk. Then I gaily ran off 
and saw Parmanandbhai and word by word related what took 
place between my uncle and myself. He too was quite angry when 
he heard this and at the same time made a promise to give me Rs. 
5,000. 
I was quite overjoyed when he made a promise, and what 
pleased me more was that he swore by his son. Now from that day 
I began to think that I would surely go to London. Then I stayed 
some days in Porbandar and the more I stayed there the more I 
was assured of the promise. 
Now here is what took place at Rajkot during my absence. 
My friend Sheikh Mehtab who, I should say, is very full of tricks, 
reminded Meghjibhai of his promise and forged a letter with my 
signature in which he wrote that I stood in need of Rs. 5,000 
and so on. The letter was shown to him and it actually passed for 
a letter written by me. Then, of course, he was quite puffed up 
and made a solemn promise of giving me Rs. 5,000. I was not in-
formed of this until I reached Rajkot. 
LONDON DIARY 
7 
Now to return again to Porbandar. At length a day was 
fixed for my departure and I bade farewell to my family mem-
bers and was set off for Rajkot, with my brother Karsondas and 
Meghji's father, really an incarnation of miserliness. Before going 
to Rajkot, I went to Bhavnagar to sell off my furniture, and dis-
continue the rent of the house. I did it only in one day and was 
separated from the friends in the neighbourhood, not without tears 
from them and my kind landlady. 
I should never forget their 
kindness and that of Anopram and others. Having done this, I 
reached Rajkot. 
But I was to see Colonel Watson1 before my departure for three 
years. He was to come to Rajkot on the 19th June, 1888. Indeed 
it was a long time for me because I reached Rajkot in the begin-
ning of May. But I could not help. 
My brother entertained very 
high hopes of Colonel Watson. These days were indeed hard days. 
I could not sleep well at night, was always attacked by dreams. 
Some persons dissuaded me from going to London and some ad-
vised me to do so. Sometimes my mother too asked me not to go, 
and what was very strange that not infrequently my brother also 
changed his mind. So I was held in suspense. But, as all of them 
knew that I should not leave off anything having first begun it, 
they were silent. During the time, I was asked by my brother to 
sound the mind of Meghjibhai about his promise. The result was 
quite disappointing, of course, and from that time he always 
acted the part of an enemy. He spoke ill of me before anybody and 
everybody. But I was quite able to disregard his taunts. My dear-
est mother was quite angry with him for this and sometimes un-
easy. But I could easily console her, and I have the satisfaction 
to see that I have very often consoled her with success and have 
made her laugh heartily when she, my dear, dear mother, should 
be shedding tears on my account. 
At last Colonel Watson came. 
I saw him. He said: "I shall think about it", but I never got any 
help from him. I am sorry to say that it was with difficulty that I 
could take a trivial note of introduction which, he said in a 
peremptory voice, was worth one lac of rupees. Now really it 
makes me laugh. 
Then a day was fixed for my departure. At first it was the 
fourth of August. The matter was now brought to a crisis. The 
fact I was to go to England went through the Press. 
My brother 
was always asked by some persons about my going. Now was the 
time when he told me to leave off the intention of going, but I 
1 Political Agent of Kathiawar, stationed at Rajkot 
8 
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI 
would not do that. Then he saw H. H. the Thakoresaheb1 of Raj-
kot and requested him to render me some pecuniary help. But no 
help was obtained therefrom. 
Then for the last time I saw 
Thakoresaheb and Colonel Watson. 
Received a note of intro-
duction from the latter and a photo from the former. Here I must 
write that the fulsome flattery which I had to practise about this 
time had quite made me angry. Had it not been for my credulous 
and dearest brother, I would never have resorted to such a piece 
of gross flattery. After all the 10th August came and my brother, 
Sheikh Mehtab, Mr. Nathubhai, Khushalbhai and I started. 
I left Rajkot for Bombay. It was Friday night. I was given 
an address by my school fellows. 
I was quite uneasy when I 
rose up to answer the address.2 
When I spoke half of what I 
had to speak, I began to shake. I hope I will not do it again 
when I return to India. Before proceeding further I must write. 
Many had come to bid me farewell on the night. Messrs Keval-
ram, 
Chhaganlal (Patwari), Vrajlal, 
Harishankar, Amolakh, 
Manekchand, Latib, Popat, Bhanji, Khimji, Ramji, Damodar, 
Meghji, Ramji Kalidas, Naranji, Ranchhoddas, Manilal were 
among those who came to bid farewell. Jatashankar Vishvanath 
and others may be added. The first station was Gondal. There saw 
Dr. Bhau and took Kapurbhai with us. Nathubhai came as far as 
Jetpur. At Dhola, Usmanbhai met us and he came as far as 
Wadhwan. At Dhola, Messrs Narandas, Pranshankar, Narbheram, 
Anandrai and Vrajlal had come to bid farewell. 
Twenty-first was the day on which I was to leave Bom-
bay. 
But the difficulties which I had to withstand in Bombay are 
indescribable. My caste fellows tried their best to prevent me from 
proceeding further. Almost all of them were in opposition. And 
at length my brother Khushalbhai and Patwari himself advised 
me not to go. But I wouldn't give heed to their advice. Then the 
sea weather was the excuse which delayed my proceeding. 
My 
brother and others then left me. But on a sudden I left Bombay 
on the 4th September 1888. At this time I was very much oblig-
ed to Messrs Jagmohandas, Damodardas and Bechardas. 
To 
Shamalji, of course, I owe immense obligation, and what I owe 
to Ranchhodlal3 I don't know. It is something more than obli-
gation. Messrs Jagmohandas, Manshankar, Bechardas, Narayan-
das Patwari, Dwarkadas, Popatlal, Kashidas, Ranchhodlal, Modi, 
1 Ruler of the State 
2 Vide "Speech at Alfred High School, Rajkot", 4-7-1888. 
3 Ranchhodlal Patwari was very close to Gandhiji with whom he was 
in correspondence. 
Patwari's father helped him financially to go to England. 
LONDON DIARY 
9 
Thakore, Ravi Shankar, Pherozeshah, Ratanshah, Shamalji and 
some others came to see me off on board the steamer, Clyde. 
Of 
these, Patwari gave me Rs. 5, Shamalji as many, Modi two, Kashi-
das one, Narandas two, and some others whom I forget. Mr. Man-
shankar gave me a silver chain, and then they all of them bade 
farewell for three years and departed. Before finishing this, I must 
write that had it been some other man in the same position which 
I was in, I dare say he would not have been able to see England. 
The difficulties which I had to withstand have made England 
dearer to me than she would have been. 
SEPTEMBER 4, 1888 
The sea voyage. It was about 5 p.m. when the ship weighed 
anchor. I was very anxious about the voyage but fortunately it 
agreed with me. Throughout the voyage I was not at all sea-sick 
and I had no vomiting. It was for the first time in my life that 
I sailed in a steamship. I enjoyed the voyage very much. At 
about 6 o'clock the dinner bell was rung. 
The steward asked me 
to go to the table. But I did not go and ate what I had brought 
with me. I was very much surprised at the liberty which Mr. 
Mazmudar took with me on the first night. He spoke to me in 
such a manner as if we were very old acquaintances. 
He had no 
black coat. So I gave him mine for dinner. He went to the table. 
From that night I liked him very much. 
He entrusted his keys 
to me, and I began to look upon him as my elder brother from 
that very night. There was one Maratha doctor with us as far 
as Aden. 
He, on the whole, looked like a good man. Thus for 
two days I lived upon the sweetmeat and fruits which I had on 
board with me. Then Mr. Mazmudar made an agreement with 
some boys on board to cook us food. 
I would never have been 
able to make such an agreement. There was one Abdul Majid 
who was a first-class passenger while we were saloon passengers. 
We enjoyed our dinner cooked by the boy. 
Now something about the steamship. I liked the arrange-
ments of the steamer very much. When we sit in the cabins or 
saloon, we forget that the cabins and the saloons are a part of 
the ship. We sometimes do not feel the motion at all. The dexterity 
of the workmen and the sailors was indeed admirable. There were 
musical instruments in the steamer. I every now and then played 
upon the piano. There were cards, chessboard and draughts on the 
board. 
The European passengers always played some games at 
night. The decks are a great relief to the passengers. You are gene-
rally tired of sitting in the cabins. On the decks you get fresh air. 
10 
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI 
You can mix with and talk with the fellow-passengers if you 
are bold and have got that stuff. The scene of the sea when the 
sky is clear is lovely. On one moonlight night I was watching 
the sea. I could see the moon reflected in the water. On account 
of the waves, the moon appeared as if she were moving here and 
there. One dark night when the sky was clear the stars were 
reflected in the water. The scene around us was very beautiful at 
that time. I could not at first imagine what that was. They appeared 
like so many diamonds. But I knew that a diamond could not 
float. Then I thought that they must be some insects which can 
only be seen at night. 
Amidst these reflections I looked at the 
sky and at once found that it was nothing but stars reflected in 
waters. I laughed at my folly. This reflection of the stars gives us 
the idea of fireworks. Fancy yourself to be standing on the storey 
of a bungalow watching the fireworks performed before you. 
I 
very often enjoyed this scene. 
For some days I did not speak a word to the fellow-passengers. 
I always got up at 8 a.m. in the morning, washed my teeth, then 
went to the W.C. and took my bath. 
The arrangement of the 
English water closets astonished a native passenger. We do not 
get there water and are obliged to use pieces of paper. 
After enjoying the sea voyage for about five days, we reached 
Aden. During these days not a single piece of land or a moun-
tain was seen by us. All of us were tired of the monotony of the 
voyage and were eager to see land. At last on the morning of 
the 6th day we saw land. All looked gay and cheerful. At about 
11 a.m. we anchored at Aden. Some boys came with small boats. 
They were great swimmers. Some Europeans threw some money 
in the waters. They went deep into the waters and found out the 
money. I wish I could do so. This was a pretty sight. We, after 
enjoying this sight for about half an hour, went to see Aden. I 
must say here that we simply saw the boys finding out the pieces. 
Ourselves did not throw a single pie. From this day we began to 
experience the idea of expenses of England. We were three per-
sons and had to pay two rupees for boat hire. The coast was 
hardly at a mile's distance. We reached the coast in 15 minutes. 
Then we hired a carriage. We intended to go to see the water-
works which are the only object of interest in Aden. But, unfortu-
nately, the time being up we could not go there. 
We saw the 
Camp of Aden. It was good; the buildings were good. They were 
generally shops. The construction of the buildings was most pro-
bably like that of the bungalows in Rajkot and especially the new 
bungalow of the Political Agent. 
I could not see any well or 
LONDON DIARY 
11 
any place of fresh water there. 
I am afraid that perhaps the 
tanks are the only place for fresh water. The heat of the sun was 
excessive. I was quite wet with perspiration. This was because 
we were not far from the Red Sea. What astonished me more was 
that I saw not a single tree or a green plant. Men rode on mules 
or asses. We could hire mules if we liked. The camp is situated 
on the hill. I heard from the boatman, when we returned, that the 
boys of whom I wrote above are sometimes injured. The legs of 
some and arms of others are cut off by sea animals. But still the 
boys, being very poor, sat each in their small boats in which we 
dare not sit. Each of us had to pay one rupee for the carriage 
fare. The anchor was weighed at 12 a.m. and we left Aden. But 
from this day we always saw some land. 
In the evening we entered the Red Sea. We began to feel 
the heat. But I don't think it was so scorching, as is described 
by some in Bombay. Indeed it was unbearable in the cabins. You 
cannot expose yourself to the sun. You will not like to stay even 
for a few minutes in your cabin. 
But if you are on the deck 
you are sure to receive pleasant gales of fresh air. At least I did 
so. Almost all the passengers slept on the deck and so did I. 
The heat of the new morning sun, too, you cannot bear. 
You 
are always safe when you are on the deck. This heat we generally 
get for three days. Then we entered the Suez on the fourth night. 
We could see the lamps in the Suez from a great distance. The 
Red Sea was sometimes broad and sometimes quite narrow. So nar-
row that we can see the land on both the sides. Before entering 
the Suez Canal we passed the Hellsgate. Hellsgate is a piece of 
water very narrow, bound on both the sides by hills. It is so 
called because many ships are wrecked at that place. We saw the 
wreck of a ship in the Red Sea. 
We stayed at Suez about half 
an hour. Now it was said that we shall receive cold. Some said that 
you will require liquor after leaving Aden. But it was false. Now 
I had begun to talk a little with the fellow-passengers. They said, 
after leaving Aden you will require meat: but it was not so. For 
the first time in my life I saw the electric light in the front 
of our ship. It appeared like moonlight. The front part of the 
ship appeared very beautiful. 
I think it must appear more 
beautiful to a man seeing it, placed on some other place, just as 
we cannot enjoy the beauty of our person as others, i.e., we can-
not see it to advantage. The construction of the Suez Canal I 
am not able to understand. It is indeed marvellous. I cannot 
think of the genius of a man who invented it. 
I don't know 
how he would have done it. It is quite right to say that he has 
12 
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI 
competed with nature. It is not an easy task to join two seas. 
Only one ship can pass through the Canal at a time. It requires 
skilful pilotship. The ship sails at a very low motion. We cannot 
feel its motion. The water of the Canal is quite dirty. I forget 
its depth. It is as broad as the Aji1 at Ramnath. You can see men 
passing by on both the sides. The part near the Canal is barren. 
The Canal belongs to the French. 
Another pilot comes from 
Ismailia to direct the ship. 
The French take a certain sum of 
money for every ship that passes through the Canal. The income 
must be very large. Besides the electric lamp in the ship, there are 
seen lights at a distance of some 20 feet on both sides. These are 
the lights of different colours. The ship has to pass these rows of 
lights. It takes about 24 hours to pass through the Canal. The 
beauty of the scene it is beyond my power to describe. 
You 
cannot enjoy it unless you see it. Port Said is the terminus of the 
Canal. Port Said owes its existence to the Suez Canal. We an-
chored at Port Said in the evening. The ship was to stay there for 
an hour, but one hour was quite sufficient to see Port Said. Now 
the currency was English. Indian money is quite useless here. 
The boat-fare is six pence each. 
A penny is worth one anna. 
The construction of the Port Said buildings is French. Here we get 
an idea of the French life. There we saw some coffee restaurants. 
At the first I thought it was a theatre. But it was nothing but a 
coffee house. [On] one side we drink coffee or soda or tea or any 
drink, and on the other we hear music. Some women are playing 
fiddle bands. A bottle of lemonade in these cafes, as they are called, 
will cost you 12 pence, which we get for less than a penny in 
Bombay. Customers are said to hear music gratis. But really it is 
not so. 
As soon as the music is finished, a woman, with a plate 
covered with a handkerchief in her hand comes before every custo-
mer. That means that you give her something and we are obliged 
to give something. We visited the cafe and gave 6 pence to the 
woman. Port Said is nothing but a seat of luxury. There women 
and men are very cunning. The interpreter will follow to guide 
you. But you boldly tell him that you do not want him. Port Said 
is hardly as big as the proper para2 of Rajkot. We left Port Said 
at 7 p.m. 
Among our fellow-passengers one Mr. Jeffreys was very 
kind to me. He always told me to go to the table, and take some-
thing there, but I would not go. He said, after leaving Brindisi 
1 River near Rajkot 
2 Locality 
LONDON DIARY 
13 
you will feel cold, but it was not so. After 3 days we reached 
Brindisi at night. The harbour of Brindisi is beautiful. The stea-
mer just touches the coast and you descend to the coast by means 
of a ladder provided there. It being [dark] I could not see Brindisi 
much. There everyone speaks Italian. Roads of Brindisi are paved 
with stones. The streets are sloping. They too are paved. Gas is 
used for lamps. We saw the station of Brindisi. It was not so 
beautiful as the stations of the B. B. & C. I. Ry. But the railway 
carriages were far bigger than ours. 
The traffic was good. When 
you land at Brindisi, a man would come and ask you, in case you 
are a black man: "Sir, there is a beautiful girl of 14, follow me, 
Sir, and I will take you there, the charge is not high, Sir." You 
are at once puzzled. But be calm and answer boldly that you don't 
want her and tell the man to go away and thereby you will be 
safe. If you are in any difficulty at once refer to a policeman 
just near you, or at once enter a large building which you will 
surely see. But before you enter it, read the name on the build-
ing and make sure that it is open to all. This you will be able 
to make out at once. Tell the porter there that you are in a diffi-
culty, and he will at once show you what you should do. If you 
are bold enough, ask the porter to take you to the Chief Officer 
and you will refer the matter to him. By a large building I mean 
that it must be belonging to Thomas Cook or Henry King or some 
such other agents. They will take care of you. Don't be miserly at 
that time. Pay the porter something. But this means is to be resorted 
to when you think yourself to be in any danger. But these buildings 
you will only see on the coasts. If you are far away from the coast 
you are to find out a policeman and in case of failure, your cons-
cience is the best dictator. We left Brindisi early in the morning. 
After about 3 days we reached Malta. 
The ship anchored 
at about 2 p.m. She was to stay there for nearly four hours. Mr. 
Abdul Majid was to come with us. But somehow or other he was 
very late. I was quite impatient to go. Mr. Mazmudar said: "Shall 
we go alone and not wait for Mr. Majid?" I said: "Just as you 
please. I have no objection." Then, of course, we went alone. On 
our return Abdul Majid saw us and said he was very sorry that we 
went away. Then Mr. Mazmudar said: "It was Gandhi who was 
impatient and told me not to wait for you." I was really very 
much offended by such behaviour of Mr. Mazmudar. I did not 
try to wash off the charge but silently accepted it. 
But I know 
that the charge would have been washed off, had I only hinted 
to Abdul Majid: "Had Mr. Mazmudar really wanted to wait for 
you, he had better not act according to what I said." And I think 
14 
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI 
this would have been quite sufficient to convince Mr. Abdul Majid 
of my having no hand in the doing. But at that time I did not 
mean to do anything of the kind. But from that day I began to 
entertain very low opinion about Mr. Mazmudar, and from that 
day I had no real respect for him. Besides there happened two or 
three things which made me like Mazmudar the less day by day. 
Malta is an object of interest. There are many things to see. 
But the time at our disposal was not sufficient. 
As I said before, 
Mr. Mazmudar and myself went to the coast. Here we had received 
a great rogue. We had to suffer a great loss. We took the number 
of the boat, and to see the city we hired a carriage. The rogue 
was with us. After driving for about half an hour, we reached 
St. Juan Church. The church was beautifully built. There we saw 
some skeletons of eminent persons. They were very old. We gave 
a shilling to the friend who showed us over the church. Just oppo-
site the church was a statue of St. Juan. 
Thence drove to the 
city. The roads were paved. On both sides of the pavement were 
paved walks for men. The island is very beautiful. There are many 
grand buildings. Went to see the Armoury Hall. This hall was 
beautifully decorated. There we saw very old paintings. They were 
not really paintings but embroidered in. But a stranger would not 
perceive that it was embroidered work unless told by somebody. 
In the hall were the arms of old warriors. All of them [were] worth 
seeing. 
Having no record, I do not remember them all. 
There 
was a helmet which was 30 lb. in weight. The carriage of Napo-
leon Bonaparte was very beautiful. Having given a tip of 6d. to 
the man who showed us over the hall we returned. We were obliged 
to take off our hats when we saw the church and the Armoury 
Hall, as a token of respect. Then we went to the shop of the rogue. 
He tried to force something upon us. But we wouldn't buy anything. 
At length Mr. Mazmudar bought the views of Malta for 2/6. 
Here the rogue gave us an interpreter and himself did not come 
with us. The interpreter was a very good man. He drove us to 
the orange gardens. We saw the gardens. I did not like the gardens 
at all. I like our public park of Rajkot better than the gardens. If 
there was anything worth seeing for me, it was the golden and red 
fishes in a small enclosure of water. 
Thence we returned to the 
town, went to a hotel. 
Mr. Mazmudar took some potatoes and 
tea. On our way we met an Indian. Mr. Mazmudar being a very 
bold man spoke to the Indian. On further talk with him it was 
found that he was the brother of a man who had a shop in Malta. 
We at once went to the shop. Mr. Mazmudar had a good chat 
with the shopkeeper. We made some purchases there and spent 
LONDON DIARY 
15 
two hours in the shop. So we could not see much of Malta. We 
saw another church. That too was very beautiful and worth seeing. 
We had to see the opera house but we had no time to do that. 
We took leave of the gentleman who gave Mr. Mazmudar his 
card to his brother in London. On our return, the rogue again 
met us and came with us at 6 p.m. We reached the coast and paid 
the rogue, the good interpreter and the carriageman. We had a 
quarrel about the fare with the boatman. The result was, of 
course, in favour of the boatman. 
Here we were cheated a good 
deal. 
The steamer Clyde left at 7 p.m. After 3 days' voyage we 
reached Gibraltar at 12 p.m. The ship remained there the whole 
night. I had a good mind to see Gibraltar, so got up early in the 
morning and awakened Mazmudar and asked him whether he 
would come with me to the shore or not. He said he would. Then 
I went to Mr. Majid and awoke him. We three went to the shore. 
The time at our disposal was only 1½ hours. It being the dawn of 
the day all the shops were shut. It is said that Gibraltar being a 
free port smoking is very cheap. Gibraltar is built upon a rock. 
On the top is the fortification which to our great sorrow we could 
not see. 
The houses are in rows. 
In order to go from the first 
row to the second, we are obliged to ascend certain steps. I liked 
it very much. The construction was beautiful. Roads were paved. 
Having no time we were soon obliged to return. The ship weighed 
anchor at 8.30 a.m. 
In three days we reached Plymouth at 11 p.m. Now was the 
proper time for cold. 
Each and every passenger said that we 
would die without meat and drink but nothing of the kind 
happened to us. Indeed it was pretty well cold. We were also told 
about the storm but could not see the storm. Really I was very 
anxious to see it but could not. It being night we could see no-
thing of Plymouth. We had dense fog there. At length the ship 
left for London. In 24 hours we reached London; left the steamer 
and reached Victoria Hotel via Tilbury Station on the 27th1 
October, 1888, at 4 p.m. 
27TH2 OCTOBER, 1888, SATURDAY, TO 23RD NOVEMBER, FRIDAY 
Mr. Mazmudar, Mr. Abdul Majid and I reached the Victo-
ria Hotel. Mr. Abdul Majid told in a dignified air to the porter 
1 & 2 The source has "28th" which was a Sunday. 
Evidently this is a 
slip. 
In 
An 
Autobiography, Pt. I, Ch. XIII, Gandhiji says he arrived in 
London on a Saturday, which fell on October 27. 
16 
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI 
of the Victoria Hotel to give our cabman the proper fare. 
Mr. 
Abdul Majid thought very highly of himself, but let me write here 
that the dress which he had put on was perhaps worse than 
that of the porter. He did not take care of the luggage too, and as 
if he had been in London for a long time stepped into the hotel. 
I was quite dazzled by the splendour of the hotel. I had never in 
my life seen such pomp. My business was simply to follow the 
two friends in silence. 
There were electric lights all over. 
We 
were admitted into a room. There Mr. Majid at once went. The 
manager at once asked him whether he would choose second floor 
or not. 
Mr. Majid thinking it below his dignity to inquire 
about the daily rent said yes. The manager at once gave us a bill 
of 6s. each per day and a boy was sent with us. 
I was all the 
while smiling within myself. 
Then we were to go to the second 
floor by a lift. 
I did not know what it was. The boy at once 
touched something which I thought was lock of the door. But as 
I afterwards came to know it was the bell and he rang in order 
to tell the waiter to bring the lift. The doors were opened and 
I thought that was a room in which we were to sit for some 
time. But to my great surprise we were brought to the second 
floor. 
[Incomplete] 
