40. 
PETITION TO NATAL LEGISLATIVE COUNCIL1 
DURBAN, 
July 4, 1894 
THE PETITION OF THE UNDERSIGNED INDIANS 
RESIDENT IN THE COLONY OF NATAL 
HUMBLY SHEWETH THAT: 
Your 
Petitioners have been 
appointed 
by 
the Indian 
community resident in this Colony to address this humble 
petition to your Honourable Council with regard to the Franchise 
Law Amendment Bill which was read a third time on the 2nd 
July in the Hon. the Legislative Assembly. 
Your Petitioners, 
instead of setting forth 
herein 
their 
grievances 
at length, 
respectfully beg to refer your Hon. Council to the petition made 
by the Indians to the Hon. the Legislative Assembly regarding 
the Bill, a printed copy of which is annexed hereto for ready refe-
rence by the Hon. Members. The petition has been signed by 
nearly 500 Indians. This was done in the short space of one day. 
Had the Petitioners been given more time, from all the reports 
received from the various districts, they fully believe that at least 
10,000 Indians would have signed it. Your Petitioners were in hopes 
that the Hon. the Legislative Assembly would see the justice of their 
prayer and grant it, but their hopes have been frustrated. Your 
Petitioners, therefore, have ventured to approach your Hon. Council 
with a view to inducing the Hon. Members to give close atten-
tion to the petition hereinbefore referred to, 
and to use your 
correctional power in consonance with justice and equity. Some 
of your Petitioners undersigned had the honour to see some of the 
Hon. Members of the Lower House in connection with the petition 
aforesaid, and they all seemed to admit the justice of the prayer 
contained in the said petition, but the general feeling seemed to 
be that it was addressed too late. Your Petitioners, without going 
into the question, would respectfully submit that, assuming that 
it was so, the consequences of the Bill becoming law would be so 
grave, and the prayer is so just and modest, that being too late 
1 This was presented to the President and members of the Legislative 
Council by Hon. Henry Campbell, advocate and chief agent for British Indian 
merchants in the Transvaal who drafted and presented petitions for them. 
EXTRACT FROM LETTER TO DADABHAI NAOROJI 
139 
should not have weighed with the Hon. Members at all in consi-
dering the petition. Instances of Bills being thrown out or modi-
fied, under less imperative circumstances, by the Parliaments of 
civilized countries, after they have passed through the committee 
stage, would not be difficult to find. Your Petitioners need hardly 
mention the instance of the House of Lords having thrown out the 
Irish Home Rule Bill1, and the circumstances under which it was 
so treated. The Franchise Law Amendment Bill as it stands is, your 
Petitioners submit, so sweeping a measure, that no Indian who is 
not already on the Voters' List, no matter how capable he may be, 
can become a voter if the Bill becomes law. Your Petitioners trust 
that your Hon. Council will not endorse such a view, and will, 
therefore, send the Bill back again to the Legislative Assembly for 
its reconsideration. 
And for this act of justice and mercy, your Petitioners, as in 
duty bound, will ever pray. 
The Natal Advertiser, 5-7-1894 
