41. EXTRACT FROM LETTER TO DADABHAI NAOROJI2 
DURBAN, 
July 5, 1894 
The first Parliament of Natal under Responsible Government 
has been pre-eminently an Indian Parliament. 
It has for the 
most part occupied itself with legislation affecting Indians, by 
no means favourably. The Governor, in opening the Legislative 
Council and Assembly, remarked that his Ministers would deal 
with the Franchise which was exercised by Indians in Natal, al-
though they never exercised it in India. The reasons given for the 
sweeping measure to disfranchise Indians were that they had never 
exercised the Franchise before, and that they were not fit for it. 
1 This was introduced by Gladstone in 1886 in the British Parliament. 
It sought to transfer Irish administration to an executive appointed by an 
Irish Parliament but left the power of taxation largely to the British Govern-
ment. 
It met with furious opposition in the House of Commons. 
In 1893, 
Gladstone, again in office, introduced a Home Rule Bill which was passed in 
the Commons, but was rejected in the Lords by an overwhelming majority. 
2 Dadabhai Naoroji (1825-1917); Statesman, often called "the Grand 
Old Man of India". 
Thrice presided over the Congress sessions, in 1886, 
1893 and 1906. Enunciated, for the first time, Congress goal as one of swaraj 
or independence. 
Member of the British Committee of the Congress in 
London. 
140 
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI 
The petition of the Indians seemed to prove a sufficient answer 
to this. Hence they have now turned round and given out the real 
object of the Bill, which is simply this: "We do not want the 
Indians any more here. We want the coolies, but they shall remain 
slaves here and go back to India as soon as they are free." 
I 
earnestly request your undivided attention to the cause and appeal 
to you to use your influence that always has been and is being 
used on behalf of the Indians, no matter where situated. The 
Indians look up to you as children to the father. Such is really 
the feeling here. 
A word for myself and I have done. I am yet inexperienced 
and young and, therefore, quite liable to make mistakes. The 
responsibility undertaken is quite out of proportion to my ability. 
I may mention that I am doing this without any remuneration. So 
you will see that I have not taken the matter up, which is beyond 
my ability, in order to enrich myself at the expense of the Indians. 
I am the only available person who can handle the question. You 
will, therefore, oblige me very greatly if you will kindly direct 
and guide me and make necessary suggestions which shall be receiv-
ed as from a father to his child. 
Dadabhai Naoroji: The Grand Old Man of India, pp. 468-9 
