42. 
PETITION TO NATAL LEGISLATIVE COUNCIL1 
DURBAN, 
July 6, 1894 
TO 
THE HONOURABLE THE PRESIDENT AND MEMBERS OF HONOUR-
ABLE THE LEGISLATIVE COUNCIL OF THE COLONY OF NATAL 
THE PETITION OF THE UNDERSIGNED INDIANS 
RESIDENT IN THE COLONY OF NATAL 
HUMBLY SHEWETH THAT: 
(1) Your Petitioners have been appointed by the Indian 
community resident in this Colony to approach your Honourable 
Council with regard to the "Franchise Law Amendment Bill". 
(2) Your Petitioners regret sincerely that their petition pre-
sented on 4th July, 1894, through the Honourable Mr. Camp-
1 This was presented by the Hon. Mr. Campbell to the Legislative Council 
of the Natal Parliament on July 6, 1894, on behalf of Hajee Mahomed Hajee 
Dada and seven other Indians. 
PETITION TO NATAL LEGISLATIVE COUNCIL 
141 
bell, being not in order, they have again to trespass on your 
Honourable Council's valuable time. 
(3) Your Petitioners, as trusted and responsible 
members 
of the Indian community, beg to draw your Honourable Council's 
attention to the fact that the Bill under discussion has created 
a widespread feeling of dissatisfaction and disappointment among 
the Indian community. The more the provisions of the Bill 
become known among the Indians, the more your Petitioners 
hear the following expressions of opinion: "Sarkar Mabap1 is going 
to kill us, what shall we do?" 
(4) With the greatest respect to your Honourable Council, 
your Petitioners submit that this is no mere idle expression of 
opinion, but a sincere one, which is worthy of the most serious 
consideration by the Honourable Council. 
(5) It is not, your Petitioners venture respectfully to submit, 
a fact that the Indians do not know what voting means, as was 
attempted to be shown during the debate on the second reading of 
the Bill in your Honourable Council. They know very well what 
privilege a right of voting confers, and feel also the responsibility 
such a privilege carries with it. Your Petitioners only wish that 
your Honourable Council could personally witness the excitement 
and the anxiety with which every stage in the progress of the 
Bill is watched by the Indian community. 
(6) Your Petitioners would not, for one moment, say that 
every member of the community has such a knowledge and, there-
fore such a feeling, but they may be permitted to say that it is gene-
ral. Nor would your Petitioners hold that there are not Indians 
who should have no right to vote, but your Petitioners submit that 
that is no reason why the Indians should be excluded wholesale 
from the privilege. 
(7) Your Petitioners venture to submit for your Honourable 
Council's consideration some of the anomalous results that would 
follow the operation of the Bill: 
(a) The Bill arbitrarily keeps on the Voters' List those 
who are already there, while it forever shuts the door against 
any new addition of a person who has not chosen to exercise 
the privilege hitherto. 
(b) While some Indian fathers will be able to vote, their 
children never can, although the latter may surpass the 
former in every respect. 
1 Government considered as "mother-father" 
142 
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI 
(c) It practically puts the free and indentured Indians 
in the same scale. 
(d) Taking out for a moment the question of policy 
as the principle of the Bill, which seems to have developed 
but lately, the Bill seems to lay down that India has not at the 
present moment any Indian who is fit to exercise the privilege 
of franchise and that there is such a wide difference between a 
European and an Indian that contact with the former, even 
for any length of time, does not fit him for the exercise of the 
precious privilege. 
(8) Is it fair, your Petitioners humbly ask, that, while the 
father is a voter, he has to see his son, on whom he has lavished 
enormous sums of money to educate him so that he may become 
a public man, unable to possess a right that is now recognized as 
the birthright of all really educated persons born in civilized coun-
tries where representative institutions prevail? 
(9) Your Petitioners would very much like to have dwelt 
upon the fear that the permission to allow the Asiatic to vote would 
ultimately result in a Government of Natives by coloured people, 
the Indians. But your Petitioners are afraid that this is not the 
occasion on which your Petitioners may lay their humble views 
before your Honourable Council on the question. They would 
rest content with saying that, in their opinion, such a contingency 
can never happen, and certainly the time is not ripe to provide 
against it, were it even possible in the remote future. 
(10) Your Petitioners beg respectfully to submit that the Bill 
makes an invidious distinction between one class of British subjects 
and another. But it has been said that, if Indian British subjects 
are to be treated equally with the Europeans, the same treatment 
should be accorded to other British subjects, e.g., the Natives of the 
Colony. Without entering into odious comparisons, your Petitioners 
would venture to quote from the Royal Proclamation of 1858, 
which would show on what principles the British Indian subjects 
have been and should be treated: 
We hold ourselves bound to the Natives of our Indian territories 
by the same obligations of duty which bind us to all our other subjects, 
and those obligations, by the blessing of Almighty God, we shall faithfully 
and conscientiously fulfil. 
And it is our further will that, so far as may 
be, our subjects, of whatever race or creed, be freely and impartially 
admitted to offices in our services, the duties of which they may be quali-
fied by their education, ability and integrity, duly to discharge. 
In their 
prosperity will be our strength, in their contentment our security, and in 
their gratitude our best reward. 
PETITION TO NATAL LEGISLATIVE COUNCIL 
143 
(11) On the lines laid down in the above extract, and also 
the Charter of 18331, the Indians have been admitted to the most 
responsible posts in India, e.g., that of Chief Justice. And yet here, 
in a British Colony, an attempt is being made to deprive your 
Petitioners or their brethren or their children of the commonest 
right of an ordinary citizen. 
(12) It has now been said that the Indians know the Muni-
cipal Self-government but not the Political. Your Petitioners sub-
mit that this, too, is not now strictly true. But granting that it is 
strictly so, should that be any reason for barring the door to Poli-
tical Franchise to Indians in a country where a Parliamentary 
Government prevails? Your Petitioners submit that the real and 
only test should be whether your Petitioners, and those on whose 
behalf they plead, are capable or not. A person coming from 
under Monarchical Government, e.g., Russian, may not have 
been able to show his capabilities to understand or appreciate 
Representative Government, and yet your Petitioners venture to 
believe your Honourable Council will not condemn such a one 
as unfit, if he is otherwise capable and fit. 
(13) Before concluding, your Petitioners beg to draw your 
Honourable Council's attention to the following memorable words 
of Lord Macaulay: "Free and civilized as we are, it is to little pur-
pose, if we grudge to any portion of the human race an equal 
portion of freedom and civilization." 
(14) Your Petitioners fervently trust that the above facts and 
arguments, if they prove nothing else, will prove to the satisfaction 
of your Honourable Council that a real necessity exists for a 
Commission of enquiry as to the fitness or the unfitness of the 
Indians to exercise the Franchise, as also to ascertain whether there 
is any ground for the fear that, in case of the Indians being al-
lowed to exercise the privilege of Franchise as heretofore, their 
vote will swamp the European vote, and that they will have the 
reins of Government in their hands, and also to report upon such 
other important questions. Your Petitioners pray, therefore, that 
your Honourable Council will send the Bill back for reconsi-
deration by the Honourable the Legislative Assembly, with such 
1 Based on the findings of a Parliamentary Commission of Enquiry, the Act 
abolished the East India Company's trading rights in India and confined its 
function to ruling its possessions. Reaffirmed in 1853, the Charter Act provided 
that no Indian shall be disabled from holding any place, office or employ-
ment under the East India Company by reason of his religion, place of birth, 
descent or colour. 
144 
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI 
just and equitable recommendations as your Honourable Council 
may think fit. 
And for this act of justice and mercy, your Petitioners, as in 
duty bound, shall for ever pray, etc., etc. 
Colonial Office Records No. 181, Vol. 38 
