43. 
LETTER TO "THE NATAL MERCURY"1 
DURBAN, 
July 7, 1894 
TO 
THE EDITOR 
The Natal Mercury 
SIR, 
It was a treat to read your learned and able leader in to-
day's issue. It was not expected that there would be nothing to 
be said against the franchise petition. 
That would be a won-
drous—I was almost going to say, superhuman—thing that would 
not have its two sides, in these modern times. On the same 
principle, Sir George Chesney is not the only writer who would 
serve your purpose. 
Sir Henry Sumner Maine was also, 
after all, a mortal. It is, therefore, only natural that his theories 
and conclusions should be contested. 
There seems to be no 
escape for a mortal from "the pairs of opposites". I would, how-
ever, without for the present presenting the other aspect of the 
1 This was in reply to an article entitled "Indian Village Communities", 
in The Natal Mercury, 7-7-1894, commenting on the petition presented to the 
Natal Legislative Council by the Indian community in connection with the 
Franchise Law Amendment Bill. 
It was argued that Parliamentary Govern-
ment was very different from any form of representation known to the village 
communities of India. 
The Bill excluded Indians from the franchise on the 
ground that they had not exercised the franchise in their own country. 
The 
Indians pleaded that they had done so from ancient times in their village 
communities. But The Natal Mercury contested this view, and that of Sir Henry 
Sumner Maine, in his Village-Communities in the East and West, that Indians had 
been familiar with representative institutions almost from time immemorial. 
It maintained that Indian village-communities had nothing to do with political 
representation but only with the legal question of land tenure. 
It argued that 
village-community life was common to all primitive peoples and, if anything, 
proved 
the backwardness of a people, and quoted General Sir George 
Chesney's views in The Nineteenth Century to the effect that Indians were still 
in their political infancy. 
LETTER TO "THE NATAL MERCURY" 
145 
case, beg leave to revert to the matter on some future occasion. 
The object of writing this letter is to "surprise" you. The 
State of Mysore, I am glad to say, has given the political fran-
chise rights to its subjects. I take the following from a newspaper 
report: 
Under the system now expounded by the Dewan, all landholders 
paying a revenue of Rs. 100 or more, or mohatarfa1 of Rs. 13 and up-
wards, are entitled to vote for members of the Representative Assembly, 
and are eligible to become members themselves. 
Besides, all non-official 
graduates of any Indian University, ordinarily residing in the taluk, 
have been given the privilege of electing, as well as of being elected. 
Thus property as well as intelligence will be represented in the Assembly. 
Further, it has also been specified that public associations, municipalities 
and the local boards may also elect members. 
The total number of 
members fixed is 347, and these members are elected by nearly 4,000 
electors. 
Sir, I appeal to your good sense, and ask you, will you 
not better serve 
humanity by 
collecting and 
pointing 
out 
points 
of resemblances 
between the 
two 
peoples 
than by 
holding out to the public gaze points of contrasts, often far-
fetched or merely imaginary, that can but arouse the worst feeling 
of a man, while they can do nobody any real good? I hardly 
think it can be to your interest to sow the seeds of jealousy and 
animosity between the two nations. That, I doubt not, is in your 
power, as it is in anybody's, more or less. But a thing far higher 
and far nobler, too, lies within your reach—a thing 
that 
would bring you not only greatness, but goodness, and what is 
more, the gratitude of a nation that has not been crushed under 
1,200 years' tyranny and oppression, a fact by itself a miracle,—
and that thing is to educate rightly the Colony about India and 
its people. 
I am, etc., 
M. 
K. 
GANDHI 
The Natal Mercury, 11-7-1894 
1 Trade-tax, a word of Persian origin 
I-10 
