45. 
PETITION TO LORD RIPON1 
[DURBAN, 
Before July 14, 1894]2 
TO 
HIS 
EXCELLENCY 
THE 
RIGHT 
HONOURABLE 
MARQUIS 
OF 
RIPON, HER MAJESTY'S PRINCIPAL SECRETARY OF STATE FOR 
THE COLONIES 
THE 
PETITION 
OF 
THE 
UNDERSIGNED 
INDIANS 
NOW RESIDING 
IN 
THE 
COLONY 
OF 
NATAL 
MOST HUMBLY SHEWETH THAT: 
1. Your Lordship's Petitioners are Indian British subjects, 
residing in the various districts of the Colony of Natal. 
2. Some of Your Lordship's Petitioners are traders, who have 
come to the Colony and settled therein. Some again are those who, 
in the first instance, came from India under indenture, and have 
now, for some time (even thirty years), become free. Some are 
Indians under indenture, and some are born and educated in the 
Colony, and engaged in various pursuits of life as attorneys' clerks, 
compounders, 
compositors, 
photographers, 
schoolmasters, 
etc. 
Again, some of Your Lordship's Petitioners have considerable 
landed property in the Colony, and are duly qualified to vote at 
the election of Members for the Honourable the Legislative As-
sembly. 
And a few have got sufficient property qualifications, 
but have not been able to get their names on the Voters' Roll from 
some cause or other. 
3. Your Lordship's Petitioners hereby approach Your Lord-
ship with regard to the Franchise Law Amendment Bill, which 
was introduced last session by the Honourable Sir John Robin-
son, the Prime Minister of the Colony, and which has passed the 
third reading in the Honourable Legislative Council, and received 
1 Enclosure No. 1 in Despatch No. 66 dated July 31, 1894, from Sir 
Waiter Hely-Hutchinson, Governor of Natal, to Lord Ripon, Secretary of State 
for the Colonies. 
In An Autobiography, Pt. II, Ch. XVII, Gandhiji says he took great 
pains over this petition and obtained over 10,000 signatures for it in the 
course of a fortnight. The Prime Minister of Natal in his forwarding letter to 
the Governor set out reasons for recommending rejection of the petition. 
2 Vide the succeeding item. 
148 
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI 
the assent of His Excellency the Governor, subject to its being 
disallowed by Her Majesty. 
4. The Bill above referred to has for its object the disquali-
fication of all the persons of Asiatic extraction, who have settled 
in the Colony, to vote at the Parliamentary elections. It, however, 
excepts those who are already rightly placed on the Voters' Lists. 
5. Your Lordship's Petitioners crave leave to give a short 
history of the movement carried on to obtain redress through the 
constituted authorities in the Colony. 
6. It was when the Franchise Law Amendment Bill had passed 
the second reading that Your Lordship's Petitioners first ap-
proached 
the 
Honourable 
the 
Legislative Assembly. 
When 
Your Lordship's Petitioners became aware that two days after the 
second reading, the Bill had passed the committee stage, and a 
day after, it would pass the third reading, it was impossible to 
present a petition to the Honourable the Legislative Assembly 
unless the third reading was postponed. Your Lordship's Petitioners, 
therefore, sent a telegraphic petition1 to the Honourable the Legis-
lative Assembly, requesting that a postponement should be grant-
ed. The postponement was very graciously granted for one day. 
In that one day, about 500 Indians signed a petition which was 
the next day presented to the Honourable the Legislative Assembly. 
In Maritzburg, a deputation waited upon some Honourable Mem-
bers of the Honourable House, including the Premier and the 
Attorney-General. The deputation was very courteously received 
and given a patient hearing. Most of the Honourable Members 
waited upon more or less admitted the justice of the prayer con-
tained in the said petition, though all said that it was presented 
too late. The Honourable Prime Minister, in order that it might 
be studied, asked leave to postpone the third reading for four days. 
It might be mentioned also that telegraphic petitions were sent to 
the Honourable the Legislative Council from Verulam, Rich-
mond Road and other places, endorsing the said petition. But they 
were ruled out of order on the ground they were not presented 
through a Member of the House. Your Lordship's Petitioners 
have not annexed hereto the various petitions referred to, as 
these will no doubt be sent to Your Lordship by the Government. 
7. Four days after the presentation of the petition, i.e., on the 
2nd July, 1894, Monday, the Bill was, contrary to your Petitioners' 
expectations and much to their regret, read a third time. 
1 This is not available. 
PETITION TO LORD RIPON 
149 
8. On the Tuesday following, Your Lordship's Petitioners 
thereupon sent a petition to the Honourable the Legislative 
Council, which was presented through the Honourable Mr. Camp-
bell, but the petition was ruled not in order, because it contained 
references to the Honourable the Legislative Assembly, and the 
Bill was read a second time. Your Lordship's Petitioners, as soon 
as they knew this, lost no time in addressing another petition to 
the Honourable Council, which was sent on the Thursday follow-
ing, and was presented on Friday through the same Honourable 
Member. In the meanwhile, i.e., within one day after the second 
reading, the Bill had passed the committee stage. The Honourable 
Mr. Campbell moved the postponement of the third reading of 
the Bill, in order that the petition last mentioned might be consider-
ed. The motion, however, was not carried on the ground that the 
petition was presented too late. 
The Bill had been hardly four 
days before the Honourable 
Council, as Your Lordship will 
notice. Your Lordship's Petitioners may also mention that a 
deputation was appointed by the leading members of the Indian 
community to wait upon His Excellency the Honourable Sir 
Walter F. Hely-Hutchinson, who very kindly and courteously 
received the deputation. In order to know the individual opinions 
of the Honourable Members of the two Houses, a Committee of 
Indians sent a printed circular1 to the Honourable Members 
requesting them to answer certain questions. 
Your Petitioners 
append hereto the Circular and the Memorandum containing 
the questions. 
So far, only one Honourable Member has been 
good enough to send a reply, but he, too, has not answered the 
questions. 
9. Before proceeding to criticize the Franchise Bill, Your 
Lordship's Petitioners would beg to dispose of one point that has 
been used against Your Lordship's Petitioners, namely, that they 
approached the Honourable Assembly too late. As to this, your 
Petitioners would simply state that they were not technically too 
late, and that the issues involved were, and are, so important, and 
the Bill so vitally affected and affects Her Majesty's Indian sub-
jects that the Government, or the Honourable the Legislative 
Council and the Legislative Assembly might well have reconsi-
dered their decision and thoroughly investigated Your Lordship's 
Petitioners' case before allowing the Bill to pass the third reading. 
10. During the debate it was stated, as also it is stated in the 
preamble of the Bill, that the Asiatic communities have never exer-
1 Vide "A Circular Letter to Legislators", 1-7-1894. 
150 
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI 
cised the privilege of Franchise, and it was stated further, 
during 
the debate, that the Asiatics were not fit to exercise the Fran-
chise. These were, then, the two chief reasons alleged for the ex-
clusion of the Indians from the privilege of the Franchise. Your 
Petitioners venture to believe that the petition to the Honourable 
Assembly sufficiently disposes of the two contentions above-
mentioned. 
11. Although it was not openly acknowledged that the two 
objections to the Asiatics exercising the Franchise privilege had 
fallen through, it seemed to be tacitly recognized that such was 
the case, for it was more openly declared in the third reading of 
the Bill in the Honourable Assembly, that the exclusion was to 
be justified, not on moral and equitable grounds, as was 
contended at the time of the second reading, but on purely 
political grounds. It was said that, if the Indians were allowed 
to vote, their vote would swamp the European vote, and that there 
would be a Government by the Asiatics instead 
of by the 
Europeans. 
12. Your Lordship's Petitioners venture [to submit], with 
the greatest deference to both the Honourable Houses, that the 
above fears are entirely groundless. Even at the present moment 
there are very few Indian electors as compared with European 
electors. The Indians who come under indenture cannot pos-
sibly have the sufficient property qualifications to be qualified for 
voting during their term of indenture, and for many more years 
afterwards. It is, moreover, a notorious fact that those who come 
on their own means do not remain for good in the Colony, but 
after a certain number of years, return home and are replaced 
by other Indians. Thus, so far as the trading community is con-
cerned, the number of votes would, as a rule, always remain un-
changed. Another fact, too, cannot be lost sight of, viz., that 
the Indians do not take such an active interest in the political 
affairs of the Colony as the European section of the community. 
It seems that there are 45,000 Europeans, and the same number 
of Indians; that fact alone shows how material is the difference 
between the European and the Indian vote. And Your Lordship's 
Petitioners submit that it is well nigh impossible that any Indian 
can hope to enter into the Natal Parliament for generations to 
come. This, Your Lordship's Petitioners humbly submit, hardly 
needs any proof to support it. 
13. And if Your Lordship's Petitioners are not unfit to exer-
cise the privilege, should it matter that they have some voice in 
PETITION TO LORD RIPON 
151 
the government of the Colony, and more especially the govern-
ment of themselves? 
14. Your Lordship's Petitioners venture to submit that the Bill 
is admittedly retrograde in character and that it is manifestly unjust. 
15. The very fact that those who are rightly on the Voters' 
List are to be allowed to remain there, at once, in your Petitioners' 
humble opinion, recognizes the ability of your Petitioners to 
understand the privilege and the responsibility attached to the 
exercise of the Franchise. 
Your Lordship's Petitioners cannot 
believe that they are allowed to remain on the List even though 
they are not fit to vote, as was attempted to be shown in the course 
of the debate. 
16. It has also been said that Clause 11 of the Bill fully meets 
the ends of justice. Your Petitioners submit that it does not. On 
the contrary, it injures the feelings of both those who are on 
the List and those who are not. 
17. It is little comfort to those who are already on the List 
to know that they may vote, while their children never can, no 
matter how well educated and well qualified they may be. Indian 
parents who settle in the Colony will have, if the Bill becomes law, 
the best stimulus to give higher education to their children taken 
away from them. They would hardly like to see their sons pariahs 
of society, without a status or without any ambition in life. Even 
wealth becomes useless if it gives a man no place in society. The 
very aim with which men collect wealth is thus nipped in the 
bud. 
18. And the Second Clause vexes those who have been in the 
Colony already to know that, while their brethren, who are in no 
way superior to them, by a chance retain the right to vote, they 
themselves cannot vote simply because, perhaps, owing to cir-
cumstances entirely beyond their control, they have not been able 
to get their names on the Voters' List. 
The Bill thus makes 
between Indian British subjects of the same class an invidious 
distinction based on accidental circumstances. 
19. It has also been hinted that the justice done by the 
Second Clause is not gratefully acknowledged by your Petitioners. 
But, with the greatest respect to the just intentions of the Govern-
ment in introducing the Second Clause, Your Lordship's Petitioners 
have failed to see the justice thereof. This was even admitted by 
some Honourable Members themselves, who did not care whether 
the Second Clause was "in" or "out", as those votes were bound 
to drop off before long. This seems to be self-evident. 
152 
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI 
20. Your Lordship's Petitioners have noticed with shame 
and sorrow the zealous attempt made to compare your Peti-
tioners with the Natives of South Africa. Very often it was said 
that the Natives had a better claim to vote, if the Indians had any, 
simply because they were British subjects. Your Lordship's Peti-
tioners would not enter into a discussion of the comparison, but 
would draw Your Lordship's attention to the Royal Proclamation 
of 1858, as also to Your Lordship's own personal experience of the 
Indian nation. Your Petitioners need hardly point out the marked 
difference that exists between the Governments of Indian British 
subjects and Native British subjects. 
21. There are, at the present moment, hundreds of educated 
Indians, signatures of some of whom appear in the petition, who 
would not be able to vote at the Parliamentary elections if the 
Bill became law. Your Petitioners fully trust that Your Lord-
ship will never advise Her Most Gracious Majesty to sanction 
a Bill that would cause such a grave injustice to any section of 
British subjects. 
22. In the Natal Government Gazette of March 27, 1894, Your 
Lordship's Petitioners find, from the Indian Immigrants School 
Board Report for 1893, that there were 26 schools and 2,589 scho-
lars studying in the schools that year. Your Petitioners respectfully 
submit that these boys, who are many of them born in the 
Colony, are entirely brought up after the European style. They, in 
later life, come in contact chiefly with the European community, 
and therefore, in every respect, become as fit for the Franchise 
privilege as any European, unless there is something radically 
wanting in them to compete with the Europeans in educational 
ability. That they are not incompetent, Your Lordship's Petitioners 
submit, has been proved beyond doubt by the best authorities 
on such subjects. The results, alike in India as in England, of the 
competition between English and Indian students, furnish ample 
proof of the Indian's ability to successfully compete with 
the 
European. 
Your Lordship's Petitioners purposely refrain from 
quoting extracts from the evidence given before the Parliamen-
tary committees, or from great writers on the above head, because 
that would almost look like carrying coals to Newcastle. If, then, 
your Petitioners humbly venture to claim a vote for these boys when 
they come of age, is it not merely asking what any person in a 
civilized country would consider as his birthright and would very 
properly resent any interference with? Your Petitioners confident-
ly trust that Your Lordship will not let these boys be subjected to 
the indignity of being deprived of the commonest right of a 
PETITION TO LORD RIPON 
153 
citizen in a country governed by Parliamentary institutions. 
23. Your Lordship's Petitioners here have to note with grati-
tude that the Hon. Mr. Campbell and the Hon. Mr. Don saw and 
remarked about the injustice that would be done to those Indians 
who come to the Colony on their own means, but they, too, seem 
to think, with the other Honourable Members, that those who 
come under indenture should never get the vote. Your Lordship's 
Petitioners, while they admit (although they cannot help remark-
ing that poverty should be no crime if a man is otherwise fit) 
that the indentured Indians, while under indenture, may not have 
the right to vote, they respectfully submit that even these men 
should not for ever be deprived from voting if they acquire the 
sufficient qualifications in later life. 
Such men who come here 
are, as a rule, able-bodied and young; they come under Euro-
pean influences, and while they are under indenture, and espe-
cially after they become free, rapidly begin to assimilate them-
selves to the European civilization, and develop into full Colo-
nists. They are admitted to be very useful, in fact, invaluable 
people, who live quietly and peacefully. It may be remarked 
that most of the educated Indian youths, who are now in the Civil 
Service as clerks and interpreters, or outside it as schoolmasters, 
teachers or attorneys' clerks, have come to the Colony under 
indenture. 
It is submitted that it would be cruel not to allow 
them, or their children, to vote and to have a voice in their own 
government at any rate. Your Petitioners submit that the fact 
alone that a person is of Asiatic extraction, or has once been 
under indenture, should not be a bar to political freedom and 
political privileges, if he is or becomes otherwise duly fit and 
qualified. 
24. Your Lordship's Petitioners beg to draw Your Lord-
ship's attention to the anomaly that the Bill would rank the Indian 
lower than the rawest Native. For while the rawest Native can 
become emancipated if he acquires the proper qualifications, the 
Indian British subject who is now entitled to vote would be so 
disenfranchised that he can never again become emancipated, no 
matter how capable he becomes in after life, or how capable 
he is at the time of disenfranchisement. 
25. The measure is so sweeping and so drastic that, Your 
Lordship's Petitioners humbly submit, it is an insult to the whole 
Indian nation, inasmuch as, if the most distinguished son of 
India came to Natal and settled, he would not be able to have 
the right to vote because, presumably, according to the Colonial 
view, he is unfit for the privilege. This hardship was recognized 
154 
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI 
by the Honourable Members in both the Houses, and the Honour-
able the Treasurer went so far as to say that special cases of hard-
ship may in future be dealt with by the Parliament. 
26. To illustrate the above argument more fully, your Peti-
tioners would draw Your Lordship's attention to the papers and 
Government Gazettes in connection with the Indian vote question that 
was raised and discussed in the late Honourable the Legislative 
Council of Natal. From a Blue-book containing the correspon-
dence relating to the affairs of Natal (C-3796, 1883), your Peti-
tioners take the following from Mr. Saunders's letter to the Colo-
nial Office (page 3): 
The mere definition that these signatures must be in full, and in the 
elector's own handwriting, and written in European characters, would 
go a long way to check the extreme risk of the Asiatic mind swamping 
the English. 
Thus Mr. Saunders, zealous advocate as he was of anti-Asiatic 
policy, could not go further than this. 
In the same letter, the 
honourable gentleman says further: 
The better-class Indians feel and see there is a difference between 
the raw coolie and themselves. 
Therefore, it seems that the Government of the day was quite 
willing to distinguish between Indians and Indians. 
Now, un-
fortunately, under freer institutions, all Indians, indentured, and 
freed, and free, are attempted to be put in the same scale. Your 
Petitioners cannot help respectfully expressing that Mr. Saun-
ders's measure was comparatively very mild compared to the Bill 
under discussion. But that measure, too, did not receive support 
from Her Majesty's benign Government; much less, therefore, 
your Petitioners submit, should the Franchise Law Amendment 
Bill. In the same book above referred to, the then Protector of 
Immigrants, Mr. Graves, says, at page 7: 
I am of the opinion that only those Indians who have abandoned 
all claim for themselves and their families for a free return passage to 
India are justly entitled to the Franchise. 
He very justly pointed out also, that the signature test suggested 
by Mr. Saunders was not applied in practice to the European elec-
tors. At the same page, the then Attorney-General says in his 
report: 
It will be noticed that the measure drafted by me contains certain 
clauses which have been adopted from the recommendations of the Select 
PETITION TO LORD RIPON 
155 
Committee, providing for the carrying out of the alternative plan men-
tioned in Mr. Saunders's letter, while the proposal for the specific disquali-
fication of aliens has not been considered advisable of adoption. 
Your Lordship's Memorialists would beg to draw Your Lordship's 
attention to the same learned gentleman's report at page 91 of the 
same Blue-book. 
The temptation to quote again from another 
report by the same learned Attorney-General is irresistible. At page 
14 (ibid.) he says: 
As regards the proposal to exclude from the exercise of the Fran-
chise all persons of every nationality or race which is not in every respect 
under the common law of the Colony, this is a provision evidently aimed 
at the electoral rights at present enjoyed by the Indian and Creole popu-
lation of this Colony. 
As I have already stated in my report on Bill 
No. 12, I cannot recognize the justice or expediency of such a measure. 
27. Thus it happens that, under a freer constitution in the 
Colony, that should include Your Lordship's Petitioners also, the 
First Responsible Ministry, your Petitioners regret to say, have 
attempted to make your Petitioners less free, to disenfranchise them 
wholesale. In the face of the fact that, under the old regime, a far 
less bold attempt to restrict the rights of your Petitioners did not 
receive countenance from the Home Government, your Petitioners 
have every hope that the present attempt will meet with the same 
fate, and justice done to Your Lordship's Petitioners. 
28. The other pernicious consequences indirectly connected 
with the Franchise Bill are too numerous to mention; your Peti-
tioners would, however, crave leave to discuss a few. 
29. It is a known fact that there is, in the Colony, a wide gulf 
between the European section of the community and the Indian. 
The Indian is hated and shunned by the European. He is often 
needlessly vexed and harassed. The Franchise Bill, your Petitioners 
submit, will only accentuate such a feeling. The signs have already 
begun to appear. To verify this, your Petitioners commend the 
newspapers of the current dates to Your Lordship's attention, and 
also the debates in both the Honourable Houses. 
30. It was said, in the course of the debate on the second 
reading, that the disqualification put upon the Indians would put 
a greater responsibility upon the legislators of the Colony and that 
the Indian interests would be better protected than if they were 
represented. This, Your Lordship's Petitioners beg to submit, is 
contrary to all experience up to the present time. 
156 
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI 
31. Some Honourable Members thought that the Indians 
should not be allowed to vote at the Municipal elections also. It 
was whispered, during the debate, among the responsible quar-
ters, that that question would receive attention on a future, 
but early, date. The Franchise Bill is only the proverbial thin end 
of the wedge. Once driven a little, it would not be difficult to 
drive it through. That seemed to be the feeling. 
32. Your Lordship is aware that it is intended to levy a resi-
dential tax on the Indians coming under indenture, should they 
choose to settle in the Colony. The tax, it was said, should be suffi-
ciently heavy not to make it worth their while to stop in the 
Colony or to make it possible for them to compete with the 
Colonists. That is another indication of how your Petitioners' 
interests would be better protected if they were disenfranchised! 
33. During the debate on the Civil Service Bill, it was con-
tended by some Honourable Members that, since the Franchise 
was to be taken away from the Indians, it was as well that the 
Indians should be debarred from entering the Civil Service also. 
An amendment was moved to this effect, and was rejected only by 
the casting vote of the Honourable the Speaker of the Legislative 
Assembly, thanks to the forethought and tact of the Government 
who requested that the House should be divided. 
Your Peti-
tioners fully recognize that, in this case, the Government took up 
a very sympathetic attitude towards the Indians; but still, the ten-
dency and portents of these events are unmistakable. The Fran-
chise Bill gave the opportunity for the amendment. 
34. Your Lordship's Petitioners understand that in the Cape 
Colony no such colour or race distinctions are made. 
35. Your Lordship's Petitioners respectfully venture to point 
out that the effect of the Bill, if it became law, will be simply 
disastrous to the interests of the British Indian subjects in the 
other parts of South Africa. Down-trodden and hated as they 
already are in the Transvaal, things will be simply unbearable for 
them. If Indian British subjects in a British Colony are allowed 
to be treated at all on an unequal footing, your Petitioners 
humbly submit that a time will soon come when it will be im-
possible for Indians, having any idea whatever of self-respect, to 
remain in the Colony and that such a thing would materially 
interfere with their business, and throw hundreds of Her Majesty's 
Indian subjects out of work. 
36. In conclusion, your Petitioners hope that the above facts 
and arguments will convince Your Lordship of the injustice of 
LETTER TO DADABHAI NAOROJI 
157 
the Franchise Law Amendment Bill, and that Your Lordship will 
not allow an unwarranted interference with the rights of one section 
of Her Majesty's subjects by another. 
And for this act of justice and mercy, Your Lordship's Peti-
tioners, as in duty bound, shall for ever pray, etc., etc. 
HAJEE MOHAMED HAJEE DADA 1 
AND SIXTEEN OTHERS 
Colonial Office Records No. 179, Vol. 189 
