47. 
LETTER TO DADABHAI NAOROJI 
P. O. 
B. 253, 
DURBAN, 
July 27, 1894
Confidential 
 
TO 
THE HON. MR. DADABHAI NAOROJI, M.P. 
SIR, 
In continuation of my letter of the 14th instant I have to 
inform you as follows: 
The petition to the Home Government, a copy of which has 
already been sent to you, was sent, I hear, last week. 
Mr. Escombe1, the Attorney-General, has made a report to the 
effect—if the informant is right—that the only reason for passing 
the Bill is to prevent the Asiatics from controlling the government 
of the Natives. The real reason, however, is simply this. They 
want to put the Indians under such disabilities and subject them 
to such insults that it may not be worth their while to stop in the 
Colony. Yet, they do not want to dispense with the Indians alto-
gether. They certainly do not want those Indians who come on 
their own means and they want the indentured Indians very 
badly; but they would require, if they could, the indentured Indian 
to return to India after his term of indenture. A perfect leonine 
partnership! They know very well that they cannot do this at 
once—so they have begun with the Franchise Bill. They want 
to feel the pulse of the Home Government on the question. One 
member of the Assembly writes to me that he does not believe that 
the Home Government would sanction the Bill. I need hardly say 
1 Sir Harry Escombe (1838-99); 
Premier of Natal in 1897. He pleaded 
for Gandhiji's admission to the Bar of the Natal Supreme Court. 
LETTER TO DADABHAI NAOROJI 
159 
how important it is for the Indian community that the Bill should 
not receive the sanction. 
Natal is not a bad place for the Indians. Good many 
Indian traders earn a respectable living here. The Bill, 
if it 
became law, would be a very great blow to further Indian enter-
prise. 
Of course, I may state again, as I have done once, that there 
is not the slightest probability of the government of the Natives 
passing from the Europeans to the Indians. This is simply meant 
to frighten the Home Government. Those who live here—includ-
ing the Government—know very well that such a thing will never 
happen. They do not want the Indians to elect white members 
—2 or 3—who may look after their interests in the Parliament, so 
that the Government may work their way towards the destruction 
of the Indians without any opposition whatever. 
I have sent copies of the petition to Sir W. Wedderburn1 and 
others there and also some copies to Indian newspapers. 
Please excuse the length of my letters. You will very much 
oblige me by giving hints as to the way of working. 
I beg to remain, 
Sir, 
Your faithful servant, 
M. 
K. 
GANDHI 
From a photostat of the original: S.N. 2252 
1 Spent 25 years in India as member of the Bombay Civil Service; on 
his retirement, member of Parliament till 1900. Chairman of the British Com-
mittee of the Congress in 1893; president of the Congress in 1910 
