48. LETTER TO MRS. A. M. LEWIS 
P. O. B. 253, 
DURBAN, 
August 4, 1894 
DEAR MRS. LEWIS1, 
I thank you for your kind letter of the 27th June. 
After I wrote to you last,2 I had occasion to come in contact 
with a doctor in Pretoria. He seemed to be the only gentleman 
in addition to another who took interest in theosophical subjects. I 
gave him The Perfect Way to read. He liked it so much that he 
wished me to get another copy for him. I made him a present 
of my copy. 
I would therefore thank you if you will kindly 
send me a copy of The Perfect Way. I would send you the money 
next time. I have no time to do so this time. 
I have settled in Durban for practice as an advocate. More 
of this you will know from Mr. Oldfield. 
During my stay here I intend to spread as much as possible 
information about theosophy. (To me there is little difference bet-
ween Theosophy and Esoteric Christianity). 
I have therefore 
sent out letters3 to the President of the Vegetarian Society and 
Mrs. Besant4. 
I propose that the E.C.U. 5 should send me a selection of books 
to be sold here. I would sell the books at cost price plus the 
postage and 5% commission to be kept by me. As to the price, 
however, I should be left free to use my discretion. I would send 
up the sale proceeds of the books every three months. The adver-
tisement charges6 will be borne by me. If at the end of one year 
nothing is sold, I would return the books at my cost. I give my 
1 An admirer of Anna Kingsford, author of The Perfect 
Way, etc., and 
friend of Edward Maitland, President of the Esoteric Christian Union; she was 
a founder of the Union. 
Gandhiji appears to have come into close contact 
with her while studying for the Bar in England. 
2 The letter is not available. 
3 These are not available. 
4 Dr. Annie Besant, the theosophist leader 
5 Esoteric Christian Union 
6 For an advertisement in Gandhiji's name, vide 
"Books for Sale", 
before 26-11-1894. 
LETTER TO MRS. A. M. LEWIS 
161 
personal guarantee for the safe keeping of the books and the sale 
proceeds. 5 copies of The Perfect Way, 5 of Clothed with the Sun and 
10 of The New Gospel of Interpretation and other books may be sent 
to me. If sufficient interest is evoked, I would add on the advertising 
charges also to the cost price. 
The cost price of the books 
should be stated in each case in the letter of instruction. 
If it is necessary to read this letter or a portion thereof to 
the Union, you can do so. I hope you will be able to persuade 
the Union or those in authority to accede to the above proposal. 
If you do not think much of the Souls, what position is the 
book to occupy in respectable literature? If the author 
has 
written what is absolutely true from personal observation, the 
book cannot be lightly treated. If it is an attempt to delude the 
people into a belief in real truths by fascinating falsehoods, the 
book deserves the highest condemnation possible. For we will not 
learn truth by means of falsehoods. Of course I write this without 
meaning the slightest disrespect for the author of whom I know 
nothing. She may be a lady of the highest probity and truth. I 
only repeat that to appreciate the Souls, acquaintance with the 
author's character is absolutely necessary. 
I could get many signatures to the petition you enclosed. But 
I am afraid the Natal signatures would be quite useless. 
Is it 
not a sad commentary on the morality of the age that a most im-
portant, and yet most harmless and elevating, movement should not 
receive good support? At times when I think of these things, I 
thoroughly despair of fruits of works. A verse from the Bhagavad 
Gita saves me from utter despair and consequent inaction—a verse 
which enjoins freedom from attachment to fruits of works. 
With respects, 
I am, 
Yours sincerely, 
M. K. GANDHI 
[PS.] 
Please note change of address. 
M. K. G. 
From a photostat of the original: Courtesy: E. S. Hart 
I-11 
