49. CONSTITUTION OF THE NATAL INDIAN CONGRESS 
(ESTABLISHED 22ND AUGUST, 1894) 
PRESIDENT 
Mr. Abdoola Hajee Adam 
VICE-PRESIDENTS 
Messrs Hajee Mahomed Hajee Dada, Abdool Kadir, Hajee 
Dada Hajee Habib, Moosa Hajee Adam, P. Dawjee Mahomed, 
Peeran Mahomed, Murugesa Pillay, Ramaswami Naidoo, Hoosen 
Miran, Adamjee Miankhan, 
K. R. Nayanah, 
Amod Bayat 
(P. M. Burg), Moosa Hajee Cassim, Mahomed Cassim Jeeva, Parsee 
Rustomjee, Dawad Mahomed, Hoosen Cassim Amod Tili, Dorai-
swamy Pillay, Omar Hajee Aba, Osmankhan Rahamatkhan, 
Rangaswami Padayachi, Hajee Mahomed (P. M. Burg), Cam-
roodeen (P. M. Burg). 
HON. SECRETARY 
Mr. M. K. Gandhi 
CONGRESS COMMITTEE 
Chairman: Mr. Abdoola Hajee Adam; Hon. Secretary: Mr. M. K. 
Gandhi; Members of the Committee: The Vice-Presidents and Mes-
srs M. D. Joshi, Narsiram, Manekji, Dowjee Mammuji Mutalah, 
Muthu Krishna, Bissessar, Goolam Hoosen Randeri, Shamshoo-
deen, G. A. Bassa, Sarabjit, L. Gabriel, James Christopher, Soo-
boo Naidu, John Gabriel, Suleiman Voraji, Cassimjee Amoojee, 
R. Kundaswamy Naidu, M. E. Kathrada, Ibrahim M. Khatri, 
Shaik Farid, Varind Ismail, Ranjit, Perumal Naidoo, Parsee 
Dhanjisha, Royappan, Joosub Abdool Carim, Arjun Singh, Ismail 
Kadir, Easop Kadua, Mahomed Esak, Mahomed Hafejee, A. M. 
Paruck, Suleiman Dawjee, 
V. Narayana Pather, 
Lutchman 
Panday, Osman Ahmed & Mahomed Tayub. 
CONDITIONS OF MEMBERSHIP 
Any person approving of the work of the Congress can become 
its member by paying the subscription and signing the member-
ship form. The monthly subscription is 5/- minimum and yearly £3. 
CONSTITUTION OF THE NATAL INDIAN CONGRESS 
163 
THE OBJECTS OF THE NATAL INDIAN CONGRESS1 
1. To promote concord and harmony among the Indians and 
the Europeans residing in the Colony. 
2. To inform the people in India by writing to the newspapers, 
publishing pamphlets, and delivering lectures. 
3. To induce Hindustanis—particularly Colonial-born Indians 
—to study Indian history and literature relating to India. 
4. To inquire into the conditions of the Indians and to take 
proper steps to remove their hardships. 
5. To inquire into the conditions of the indentured Indians 
and to take proper steps to alleviate their sufferings. 
6. To help the poor and helpless in every reasonable way. 
7. To do such work as would tend to improve the moral, 
social and political conditions of the Indians. 
RULES AMENDED OR CANCELLED BY THE COMMITTEE AND 
RATIFIED BY THE CONGRESS 
1. Authority is given to rent a hall for meetings for a sum 
not exceeding £10 monthly. 
2. The Committee shall meet at least once every month. 
3. The General Meeting of the Congress shall be held at least 
once every year—not necessarily in Durban. 
4. The Hon. Secretary shall invite members from other parts 
of the Colony. 
5. The Committee shall have the power to frame and pass 
rules and shall have all other powers of ordinary transaction. 
6. The Committee shall have the power to appoint a paid 
Secretary at a reasonable salary. 
7. The Hon. Secretary shall, if he chooses, invite a European 
who takes interest in the welfare of the Congress to be a Vice-
President. 
8. The Hon. Secretary shall, if he chooses, subscribe for the 
newspapers and books for the Congress Library out of the Con-
gress Fund. 
9. The Hon. Secretary shall record in the Account Book whe-
ther a cheque is signed by himself or jointly with the signature of 
another. 
1 Vide also "Letter to The Natal Advertiser", 23-9-1895 and "Memorial to 
J. Chamberlain", 22-5-1896. 
164 
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI 
RULES PASSED BY THE COMMITTEE 
1. The Chairman shall preside at every meeting; in his absence, 
the first member of the Committee; if he too be absent, then the 
second member and so on. 
2. The Hon. Secretary shall, at the commencement of a meet-
ing, read out the minutes of the last meeting after which the 
President shall sign it. 
3. The Committee may not recognize a proposal or a resolution 
for which no notice had been given in advance to the Secretary for 
its introduction. 
4. The Hon. Secretary shall read out a detailed account of 
moneys received or spent by the Committee or the Congress. 
5. The Committee may not attend to a proposal unless such is 
proposed by a Committee member and seconded by another. 
6. The Chairman and the Secretary shall be counted by virtue 
of their offices as Committee members. 
In case of equal voting, 
the Chairman shall have a casting vote. 
7. Every member shall face the Chairman when addressing 
a meeting. 
8. Every member shall use the word Mr. in addressing an-
other member at a Committee meeting. 
9. The proceedings of a Committee meeting shall be carried 
on in one or all of the following languages: Gujarati, 
Tamil, 
Hindustani and English. 
10. If it be deemed necessary, the Chairman shall order a 
member to translate the speech of another member. 
11. Every proposal or resolution shall pass by a majority of 
votes. 
12. When the Congress has £ 50 minimum in hand, the Hon. 
Secretary shall deposit such amount in any bank he chooses in the 
name of the Natal Indian Congress. 
13. The Hon. Secretary shall be held responsible for any 
moneys he has not deposited in the Bank. 
14. An authority shall be first obtained from the Committee 
for any irregular expenditure exceeding the sum of £5. If any 
expenses are incurred exceeding the above sum by the Chairman 
or the Secretary without the sanction and approval of the Com-
mittee, it shall be held that he did it at his own responsibility. 
The Hon. Secretary shall sign cheques up to the sum of £5, and 
for any amount exceeding the said sum [they] shall be signed joint-
ly with any of the following members: Messrs Abdoola Hajee 
Adam, Moosa Hajee Cassim, Abdool Kadar, Colundaveloo Pillay, 
P. Dawjee Mahomed, Hoosen Cassim. 
CONSTITUTION OF THE NATAL INDIAN CONGRESS 
165 
15. A quorum shall be formed of ten members, in addition 
to the Chairman and the Secretary, to carry on the work of the 
meeting. 
16. The Hon. Secretary shall issue notice of a proposed meet-
ing not later than two days in advance. 
17. It shall be held that the 16th rule was observed provided 
a written notification was given through the post or a messenger. 
18. Any Committee member who is absent from six conse-
cutive meetings shall be liable to have his name struck off the 
list (after having been notified by the Committee of such intention). 
A member who is absent from a meeting shall show the cause of 
his absence at the next meeting. 
19. Any member who fails to pay his subscription for three 
consecutive months without showing any reasonable ground shall 
cease to be a member. 
20. No smoking shall be allowed at any Committee meeting. 
21. If two members get up simultaneously to speak, 
the 
chairman shall decide who is to speak first. 
22. If a sufficient number of members is present the Com-
mittee meeting shall proceed at its appointed hour. However, if 
the sufficient number is deficient at the appointed time or half 
an hour after it, the meeting shall terminate without any tran-
saction. 
23. The Natal Indian Association may use the Hall and the 
Library free of charge, and they, in return, shall give their reason-
able services such as doing writing work, etc. 
24. All the members of the Congress shall be entitled to use 
the Congress Library. 
25. The Committee members shall sit in an enclosure and 
the onlookers outside. The onlookers must not take any part in the 
proceedings. Should they create any disturbance by shouting, etc., 
they shall be liable to be expelled from the Hall. 
26. The Committee shall have the power to amend these rules 
in future.1 
From a photostat: S.N. 141 
1 A copy of the Constitution in English in Gandhiji's hand and 
a 
Gujarati manuscript copy are also available. 
