5. 
DRAFT OF LETTER TO FREDERICK LELY1 
LONDON, 
December, 1888 
DEAR SIR, 
You will know me by looking at the note which, you said, 
when I had the opportunity of seeing you, you would preserve. 
At that time I had requested you to render to me some pecu-
niary aid as a means to enable me to proceed to England; but 
unfortunately you were in a hurry to leave; so I had not the suffi-
cient time to say all that I had to say. 
I was at that time very impatient to proceed to England. So 
I left India on the 4th of September, 1888, with what little money 
I had at that time. 
What my father left for us three brothers 
was indeed very little. However, trusting that nearly £666, which 
was all my brother could with great difficulty spare for me, would 
1 Gandhiji sent this to his elder brother, Lakshmidas Gandhi. 
DRAFT OF LETTER TO FREDERICK LELY 
17 
be sufficient for my three years' stay in London, I left India for 
receiving legal education in England. I knew while in India that 
education and living in London were very expensive. But now 
from two months' experience in London I find that they are more 
so than they appeared to be in India. 
In order to live here comfortably and to receive good educa-
tion, I shall require an extra help of £400. I am a native of Por-
bandar and as such that is the only place I can look up to for such 
help. 
During the late rule of H. H. the Rana Saheb, very little en-
couragement was given to education. But we can naturally expect 
that education must be encouraged under the English Administra-
tion. I am one who can take advantage of such encouragement. 
I hope, therefore, that you may please render me some pecu-
niary help and thereby confer great and much-needed obligation 
on me. 
I have asked my brother Laxmidas Gandhi to receive [it] 
and am sending him a note to see you in person if necessary. 
Trusting you will be induced to grant my request. 
With best respects, 
I beg to remain, 
yours, 
M. 
K. 
GANDHI 
I prepared this draft of a letter three weeks ago and have 
been thinking over it ever since. 
Believing that a reply to this 
letter will come in the meantime I am sending you the draft. 
I 
have not asked for the whole amount, as it would be unreasona-
ble. Again he may think that if I had been absolutely dependent 
upon his help, I would not have proceeded to England without 
making sure of it. But having found on arrival here that I 
shall need more funds, I have asked for only the additional amount. 
I have not offered to bind myself in any way, because I did not 
think it necessary. Nor did I feel that it was proper to bind my-
self for an amount which will cover only part of my expenses. 
Besides, if. . .1 
[Incomplete] 
Mahatma, Vol. I; also from a photostat 
1 This covering note, originally written in Gujarati, was addressed to 
Lakshmidas Gandhi while forwarding the draft to him. 
I-2 
