50. LETTER TO "THE TIMES OF NATAL"1 
DURBAN, 
October 25, 1894 
TO 
THE EDITOR 
The Times of Natal 
SIR, 
I would, with your permission, venture to make a few re-
marks on your leader, entitled "Rammysammy", in your issue of 
the 22nd instant. 
I have no wish to defend the article in The 
Times of India 
noticed by you; but is not your very leader its sufficient defence? 
Does not the very heading "Rammysammy" betray a studied 
contempt towards the poor Indian? Is not the whole article a 
needless insult to him? You are pleased to acknowledge that "India 
possesses men of high culture, etc." and yet you would not, if you 
could, give them equal political power with the white man. Do 
you not thus make the insult doubly insulting? If you had thought 
that the Indians were not cultured, but were barbarous brutes, 
and on that ground denied them political equality, there would be 
some excuse for your opinions. You, however, in order to enjoy the 
fullest pleasures derived from offering an insult to an inoffensive 
people, must needs show that you acknowledge them to be intel-
ligent people and yet would keep them under foot. 
Then you have said that the Indians in the Colony are not 
the same as those in India; but, Sir, you conveniently forget that 
they are the brothers or descendants of the same race whom you 
credit with intelligence, and have, therefore, given the opportu-
nity, the potentiality of becoming as capable as their more fortu-
nate brethren in India, just as a man sunk in the depth of igno-
rance and vice of the East End of London has the potentiality 
of becoming Prime Minister in free England. 
You put upon the franchise petition to Lord Ripon an inter-
pretation it was never meant to convey. The Indians do not 
regret that capable Natives can exercise the franchise. They would 
regret if it were otherwise. They, however, assert that they too, if 
capable, should have the right. You, in your wisdom, would not 
1 This was published under the title "Rammysammy". 
LETTER TO "THE TIMES OF NATAL" 
167 
allow the Indian or the Native the precious privilege under any 
circumstances, because they have a dark skin. You would look 
to the exterior only. So long as the skin is white it would not matter 
to you whether it conceals beneath it poison or nectar. To you 
the lip-prayer of the Pharisee, because he is one, is more acceptable 
than the sincere repentance of the publican, and this, I presume, 
you would call Christianity. You may; it is not Christ's. 
And in spite of such opinions held by you, a respectable news-
paper in the Colony, you impute falsehood to The Times of India. 
It is one thing to formulate a charge, it is another to prove it. 
You end with saying that "Rammysammy" may have every 
right a citizen can desire, with one exception, viz., "political 
power". Are the heading of your leader and its tenor consistent 
with the above opinion? Or is it un-Christian, un-English to be 
consistent? "Suffer little children to come unto me," said the 
Master. His disciples (?) in the Colony would improve upon the 
saying by inserting "white" after "little". During the children's 
fete, organized by the Mayor of Durban, I am told there was not 
a single coloured child to be seen in the procession. Was this a 
punishment for the sin of being born of coloured parents? Is this 
an incident of the qualified citizenship you would accord to the 
hated 
"Rammysammy"? 
If He came among us, will He not say to many of us, "I know 
you not"? Sir, may I venture to offer a suggestion? Will you re-
read your New Testament? Will you ponder over your attitude 
towards the coloured population of the Colony? Will you then say 
you can reconcile it with the Bible teaching or the best British 
traditions? If you have washed your hands clean of both Christ 
and British traditions, I can have nothing to say; I gladly with-
draw what I have written. Only it will then be a sad day for Bri-
tain and for India if you have many followers. 
Yours, etc., 
M. 
K. GANDHI 
The Times of Natal, 26-10-1894 
