52. 
LETTER TO "THE NATAL MERCURY" 
DURBAN, 
November 26, 1894 
TO 
THE EDITOR 
The Natal Mercury 
SIR, 
You will greatly oblige me by allowing me to draw the atten-
tion of your readers to an advertisement that appears in your 
advertisement columns with regard to the Esoteric Christian Union. 
The system of thought expounded by the books advertised is not, 
by any means, a new system but a recovery of the old, presented 
in a form acceptable to the modern mind. It is, moreover, a sys-
tem of religion which teaches universality, and is based on eternal 
verities and not on phenomena or historical facts merely. In that 
system, there is no reviling Mahomed or Buddha in order to prove 
the superiority of Jesus. On the other hand, it reconciles the other 
religions with Christianity which, in the opinion of the authors, is 
nothing but one mode (among many) of presentation of the same 
eternal truth. The many puzzles of the Old Testament find herein 
a solution at once complete and satisfactory. 
If there is anyone of your readers who has found the present-
day materialism and all its splendour to be insufficient for the 
needs of his soul, if he has a craving for a better life, and if, under 
the dazzling and bright surface of modern civilization, be finds that 
there is much that is contrary to what one would expect under such 
a surface, and above all, if the modern luxuries and the ceaseless 
feverish activity afford no relief, to such a one I beg to recom-
mend the books referred to. And I promise that, after a perusal, he 
will find himself a better man, even though he may not thoroughly 
identify himself with the teaching. 
If there is anyone who would like to have a chat on the sub-
ject, it would afford me the greatest pleasure to have a quiet inter-
change of views. In such a case, I would thank any such gentle-
man to correspond with me personally. I need hardly mention 
that the sale of the books is not a pecuniary concern. Could Mr. 
Maitland, the President of the Union, or its agent here, afford to 
give them away, they would gladly do so. In many cases, the books 
have been sold at less than cost price. In a few, they have even been 
170 
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI 
given away. A systematic distribution for nothing has been found 
impossible. The books will be gladly lent in some cases. 
I would try to conclude with a quotation from a letter of the 
late Abbe Constant to the authors: "Humanity has always and 
everywhere asked itself these three supreme questions: Whence 
come we? What are we? Whither go we? Now these questions at 
length find an answer complete, satisfactory, and consolatory in 
The Perfect Way." 
I am, etc., 
M. K. GANDHI 
The Natal Mercury, 3-12-1894 
