53. 
OPEN LETTER 
DURBAN, 
[Before December 19, 1894]1 
TO 
THE HON. MEMBERS OF 
THE HON. THE LEGISLATIVE COUNCIL AND 
THE HON. THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY 
SIRS, 
Were it possible to write to you anonymously, nothing would 
have been more pleasing to me. But the statements I shall have 
to make in this letter will be so grave and important that it 
would be considered a sheer act of cowardice not to disclose my 
name. I beg, however, to assure you that I write not from selfish 
motives, nor yet from those of self-aggrandisement or of seeking 
notoriety. The one and only object is to serve India, which is by 
accident of birth called my native country, and to bring about 
better understanding between the European section of the com-
munity and the Indian in this Colony. 
The only way this can be done is to appeal to those who re-
present and, at the same time, mould public opinion. 
Hence, if the Europeans and the Indians live in a perpetual 
state of quarrel, the blame would lie on your shoulders. If both 
can walk together and live together quietly and without friction, 
you will receive all the credit. 
1 This was circulated among Europeans in Natal on December 19, 1894; 
vide the following item. 
OPEN LETTER 
171 
It needs no proof that masses throughout the world follow, 
to a very great extent, the opinions of the leaders. Gladstone's 
opinions are the opinions of half England, and Salisbury's are 
those of the other half. 
Burns1 thought for the strikers during the 
dock labourers' strike. Parnell thought for almost the whole of 
Ireland. The scriptures—I mean all the scriptures of the world— 
say so. Says The Song Celestial2 by Edwin Arnold: "What the wise 
choose the unwise people take; what the best men do the multitude 
will follow." 
This letter, therefore, needs no apology. It would hardly be 
called impertinent. 
For, to whom else could such an appeal be more aptly 
made, or by whom else should it be considered more seriously 
than you? 
To carry on an agitation in England is but a poor relief 
when it can only create a greater friction between the two peoples 
in the Colony. The relief, at best, could only be temporary. Unless 
the Europeans in the Colony can be induced to accord the Indians 
a better treatment, the Indians have a very bad time before them 
under the aegis of the Responsible Government, in spite of the 
vigilance of the Home Government. 
Without entering into details, I would deal with the Indian 
question as a whole. 
I suppose there can be no doubt that the Indian is a des-
pised being in the Colony, and that every opposition to him pro-
ceeds directly from that hatred. 
If that hatred is simply based upon his colour, then, of course, 
he has no hope. The sooner he leaves the Colony the better. No 
matter what he does, he will never have the white skin. If, how-
ever, it is based upon something else, if it is based upon an 
ignorance of his general character and attainments, he may 
hope to receive his due at the hands of the Europeans in 
the Colony. 
The question what use the Colony will make of the 40,000 
Indians is, I submit, worthy of the most serious consideration by 
the Colonists, and especially those who have the reins of Govern-
ment in their hands, who have been entrusted by the people with 
legislative powers. To root out the 40,000 Indians from the Colony 
1 John Burns (1858-1943): Prominent labour representative in the British 
Parliament (1897-1918). 
Came into prominence as a friend of working men 
during the days of the London Dock Strike of 1889. 
2 An English rendering, in verse, of the Bhagavad Gita 
172 
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI 
seems, without doubt, an impossible task. 
Most of them have 
settled here with their families. No legislation that could be per-
missible in a British Colony would enable the legislators to drive 
these men out. It may be possible to devise a scheme to effective-
ly check any further Indian immigration. But apart from that, 
the question suggested by me is, I submit, sufficiently serious to 
warrant my encroaching upon your attention and requesting you 
to peruse this letter without any bias. 
It is for you to say whether you will lower them or raise them 
in the scale of civilization, whether you will bring them down to a 
level lower than what they should occupy on account of heredity, 
whether you will alienate their hearts from you, or whether you 
will draw them closer to you—whether, in short, you would govern 
them despotically or sympathetically. 
You can educate public opinion in such a way that the hatred 
will be increased day by day; and you can, if you chose so to do, 
educate it in such a way that the hatred would begin to subside. 
I now propose to discuss the question under the following 
heads: 
1. Are the Indians desirable as citizens in the Colony? 
2. What are they? 
3. Is their present treatment in accordance with the best 
British traditions, or with the principles of justice and morality, 
or with the principles of Christianity? 
4. From a purely material and selfish point of view, will an 
abrupt or gradual withdrawal of them from the Colony result in 
substantial, lasting benefit to the Colony? 
I 
In discussing the first question, I will deal, first of all, with 
the Indians employed as labourers, most of whom have come to 
the Colony under indenture. 
It seems to have been acknowledged by those who are sup-
posed to know, that the indentured Indians are indispensable for 
the welfare of the Colony; whether as menials or waiters, whether 
as railway servants or gardeners, they are a useful addition to the 
Colony. The work that a Native cannot or would not do is cheer-
fully and well done by the indentured Indian. It would seem that 
the Indian has helped to make this the Garden Colony of South 
Africa. Withdraw the Indian from the sugar estate, and where 
would the main industry of the Colony be? 
Nor can it be said 
that the work can be done by the Native in the near future. The 
South African Republic is an instance in point. In spite of its so-
OPEN LETTER 
173 
called vigorous Native policy, it remains practically a desert of 
dust, although the soil is very fruitful. The problem how to secure 
cheap labour for the mines there has been daily growing serious. 
The only garden worthy of the name is that on the Nelmapius 
Estate, and does it not owe its success entirely to the Indian 
labour? One of the election addresses says: 
. . . and at the last, as the only thing to be done, the immigration 
of Indians was entered upon, and the Legislature very wisely rendered 
their support and help in furthering this all-important scheme. 
At the 
time it was entered upon the progress and almost 
the 
existence of the 
Colony hung in the balance. 
And now what is the result of this scheme of 
immigration? 
Financially, £10,000 has been advanced yearly out of the 
Treasury of the Colony. 
With what result? Just this, that no vote ever 
made of money to develop the industries of the Colony, or to promote 
its interest in any way in this Colony, has yielded such a financially 
profitable return as that shown by the introduction of coolies as labour-
ers into this Colony. . . . I believe the Durban population of Europeans, 
had no such labour been supplied as required for Colonial industries, 
would be less by at least half what it is today, and five workmen only 
would be required where twenty now have employment. 
Property in 
Durban generally would have remained at a value some 300 or 400 
per cent below that which now obtains, and the lands in the Colony 
and other towns, in proportion according to the value of property in 
Durban and coast land, would never have realized what it now sells at. 
This gentleman is no other than Mr. Garland. In spite of 
such invaluable help derived from "the coolie", as the poor Indian 
is contemptuously termed even by those who ought to know 
better, the honourable gentleman goes on, ungratefully, to regret 
the tendency of the Indian to settle in the Colony. 
I take the following extract from Mr. Johnston's article in the 
New Review, quoted in The Natal Mercury of the 11th August, 1894: 
One seeks the solution in the introduction of a yellow race, able to 
stand a tropical climate and intelligent enough 
to undertake 
those 
special avocations which in temperate climates would be filled by Euro-
peans. 
The yellow race, most successful hitherto in Eastern Africa, is 
the native of Hindostan—that race in divers types and divers religions 
which, under British or Portuguese aegis, has created and developed the 
commerce of the East African littoral. 
The immigration of the docile, 
kindly, thrifty, industrious, clever-fingered, sharp-witted Indian into Central 
Africa will furnish us with the solid core of our armed forces in that 
continent, and will supply us with the telegraph clerks, the petty shop-
keepers, the skilled artisans, the cooks, the minor employees, the clerks, 
174 
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI 
and the railway officials needed in the civilized administration of tropical 
Africa. The Indian, liked by both black and white, will serve as a link 
between these two divergent races. 
As to the Indian traders, who are miscalled Arabs, it would 
appear best to consider the objections raised to their coming to 
the Colony. 
From the papers, especially The Natal Mercury of 6-7-'94, 
and The Natal Advertiser of 15-9-'93, the objections appear to be 
that they are successful traders, and that, their mode of living be-
ing very simple, they compete with the European trader in petty 
trades. I dismiss as unworthy of consideration the generalizations 
from rare particular instances that the Indians resort to sharp 
practices. As to the particular instances of insolvency, I would 
only say, without meaning in the least to defend them, "Let those 
that are without sin first cast a stone". Please examine the records 
of the Insolvency Court. 
Coming to the serious objection as to successful competition, 
I believe it is true. But is that a reason for driving them out of the 
Colony? Will such a method commend itself to a body of civilized 
men? What is it that makes them so successful competitors? He 
who runs may see that it is nothing but their habits, which are 
extremely simple, though not barbarous, as The Natal Advertiser 
would have it. The chiefest element of their success, in my humble 
opinion, is their total abstinence from drink and its attendant evils. 
That habit at once causes an enormous saving of money. More-
over, their tastes are simple, and they are satisfied with compa-
ratively small profits, because they do not keep uselessly large 
establishments. In short, they earn their bread by the sweat of 
their brow. It is difficult to see how these facts can be urged as 
an objection to their stopping in the Colony. Of course, they do 
not gamble, as a rule do not smoke, and can put up with little 
inconveniences; work more than eight hours a day. Should they 
be expected to, is it desirable that they should, abandon these vir-
tues, and contract the terrible vices under which the Western 
nations are groaning, so that they may be permitted to live in the 
Colony without molestation? 
It will be best, also, to consider the common objection to 
the Indian traders and labourers. It is their insanitary habits. I 
am afraid I must, to my great mortification, admit this charge 
partially. While much that is said against their insanitary habits 
proceeds merely out of spite and hatred, there is no denying that 
in this respect they are not everything that could be desired. That, 
OPEN LETTER 
175 
however, never can be a reason for their expulsion from the Colony. 
They are not hopelessly beyond reform in this branch. A strict, 
yet just and merciful, operation of the sanitary law can, I submit, 
effectually cope with the evil, and even eradicate it. Nor is the 
evil so great as to require any drastic measures. Their personal 
habits, it would appear, are not dirty, except in the case of the 
indentured Indians, who are too poor to attend to personal clean-
liness. I may be allowed to say, from personal experience, that the 
trading community are compelled by their religion to bathe once 
a week at least, and have to perform ablutions, i.e., wash their 
faces and hands up to the elbows, and their feet, every time they 
offer prayers. They are supposed to offer prayers four times a day, 
and there are very few who fail to do so at least twice a day. 
It will, I hope, be readily admitted that they are exceptionally 
free from those vices which render a community a danger to 
society. They yield to no one in their obedience to constitutional 
authority. 
They are never a political danger. And except the 
ruffians who are sometimes picked out, of course unknowingly, 
by the immigration agents at Calcutta and Madras, they seem 
to be free from the highly grievous offences. I regret that my in-
ability to compare the Criminal Court statistics prevents me from 
making any further observations on this point. I will, however, beg 
leave to quote from the Natal Almanac: "It must be said for the 
Indian population that it is on the whole orderly and law-abiding." 
I submit that the above facts show that the Indian labourers 
are not only desirable but useful citizens of the Colony, and also 
absolutely essential to its well-being, and that the traders have no-
thing in them that should render them undesirable in the Colony. 
As to these latter, before quitting the subject, I would further 
add that they are a veritable blessing to the poor portion of the 
European community, in so far as by their keen competition they 
keep down the prices of necessities of life; and knowing their lang-
uage and understanding their customs, are indispensable to the 
Indian labourers, whose wants they study and supply, and whom 
they can deal with on better terms than the Europeans. 
II 
The second head of the enquiry is the most important, viz., 
what are they, and I request you to peruse it carefully. My pur-
pose in writing on this subject will have been served if only it stimu-
lates a study of India and its people; for, I thoroughly believe that 
one half, or even three-fourths, of the hardships entailed upon the 
Indians in South Africa result from want of information about India. 
176 
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI 
No one can be more conscious than myself of whom I am 
addressing this letter to. Some Honourable Members may resent 
this portion of my letter as an insult. To such I say with the 
greatest deference: "I am aware that you know a great deal about 
India. But is it not a cruel fact that the Colony is not the better 
for your knowledge? 
Certainly the Indians are not, unless the 
knowledge acquired by you is entirely different from and opposed 
to that acquired by others who have worked in the same field. 
Again, although this humble effort is directly addressed to you, it 
is supposed to reach many others, in fact all who have an interest 
in the future of the Colony with its present inhabitants." 
In spite of the Premier's opinion to the contrary, as expressed 
in his speech at the second reading of the Franchise Bill, with 
the utmost deference to His Honour, I venture to point out that 
both the English and the Indians spring from a common stock, 
called the Indo-Aryan. I would not be able, in support of the 
above, to give extracts from many authors, as the books of refe-
rence at my disposal are unfortunately very few. 
I, however, 
quote as follows from Sir W. W. Hunter's Indian Empire: 
This nobler race (meaning the early Aryans) belonged to the Aryan 
or Indo-Germanic stock, from which the Brahman, the Rajput, and the 
Englishman alike descend. 
Its earliest home visible to history was in 
Central Asia. 
From that common camping ground certain branches of 
the race started for the East, others for the West. 
One of the Western 
offshoots founded the Persian Kingdom; another built Athens and Laceda-
emon, and became the Hellenic nation; a third went on to Italy and 
reared the city on the seven hills, which grew into Imperial Rome. 
A 
distant colony of the same race excavated the silver ores of prehistoric 
Spain; and when we first catch a sight of ancient England, we see an 
Aryan settlement, fishing in wattle canoes and working the tin mines of 
Cornwall. 
The forefathers of the Greek and the Roman, of the Englishman 
and the Hindoo, dwelt together in Asia, spoke the same tongue and 
worshipped the same gods. 
The ancient religions of Europe and India had a similar origin. 
Thus, it will be seen that the learned historian, who must be 
supposed to have consulted all the authorities, without a shadow 
of doubt makes the above unqualified assertion. If then I err, I 
err in good company. And the belief, whether mistaken or well-
founded, serves as the basis of operations of those who are trying 
to unify the hearts of the two races, which are, legally and out-
wardly, bound together under a common flag. 
OPEN LETTER 
177 
A general belief seems to prevail in the Colony that the Indians 
are little better, if at all, than savages or the Natives of Africa. Even 
the children are taught to believe in that manner, with the result 
that the Indian is being dragged down to the position of a raw 
Kaffir1. 
Such a state of things, which the Christian legislators of the 
Colony would not, I firmly believe, wittingly allow to exist and 
remain, must be my excuse for the following copious extracts, which 
will show at once that the Indians were, and are, in no way infe-
rior to their Anglo-Saxon brethren, if I may venture to use the word, 
in the various departments of life—industrial, intellectual, poli-
tical, etc. 
As to Indian philosophy and religion, the learned author of 
the Indian Empire thus sums up: 
The Brahmin solutions to the problems of practical religion were 
self-discipline, alms, sacrifice to and contemplation of the Deity. 
But, 
besides the practical questions of the spiritual life, religion has also in-
tellectual problems, such as the compatibility of evil with the goodness 
of God, and the unequal distribution of happiness and misery in this life. 
Brahmin philosophy has exhausted the possible solutions of these difficul-
ties, and of most of the other great problems which have since perplexed 
the Greek and Roman sage, mediaeval school man and modern man of science 
(the italics are mine). The various hypotheses of creation, arrange-
ment and development were each elaborated and the views of physiologists 
at the present day are a return with new lights to the evolution theory of Kapila2 
(the italics are mine). The works on religion published in the native 
language in India in 1877 numbered 1192, besides 56 on mental and 
moral philosophy. In 1882 the total had risen to 1545 on religion and 
153 on mental and moral philosophy. 
Max Muller says with regard to Indian philosophy (the fol-
lowing, and a few more that will follow, have been partly or wholly 
quoted in the Franchise petition): 
If I were asked under what sky the human mind has most fully 
developed some of its choicest gifts, 
has most deeply pondered on the 
greatest problems of life, and has found solutions of some of them which 
well deserve the attention even of those who have studied Plato and 
Kant—I should point to India; and if I were to ask myself from what 
1 Member of a South African race; loosely applied to Natives in South 
Africa 
2 Sage of ancient India, circa seventh century B.C., who founded the 
Sankhya system of philosophy 
I-12 
178 
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI 
literature we here in Europe, we who have been nurtured almost exclusive-
ly on the thoughts of Greeks and Romans, and of one Semitic race, the 
Jewish, may draw that corrective which is most wanted in order to make 
our inner life more perfect, more comprehensive, more universal, in fact, 
more truly human—a life not for this life only, but a transfigured and 
eternal life—again I should point to India. 
The German philosopher, Schopenhauer, thus adds his testi-
mony to the grandeur of Indian philosophy as contained in the 
Upanishads: 
From every sentence deep, original and sublime thoughts arise, 
and the whole is pervaded by a high and holy and earnest spirit. 
Indian 
air surrounds us, and original thoughts of kindred spirits. . . . In the 
whole world there is no study, except that of the originals, so beneficial 
and so elevating as that of the Oupnek'hat1. 
It has been the solace of 
my life; it will be the solace of my death. 
Coming to science, Sir William says: 
The science of language, indeed, had been reduced in India to 
fundamental principles at a time when the grammarians of the West 
still treated it on the basis of accidental resemblances, and modern 
philosophy dates from the study of Sanskrit by European scholars. . . . 
The grammar of Panini 2 stands supreme among the grammars of the 
world. . . It arranges in logical harmony the whole phenomena which the 
Sanskrit language presents, and stands forth as one of the most splendid 
achievements of human invention and industry. 
Speaking on the same department of science, Sir H. S. Maine, 
in his Rede lecture, published in the latest edition of the Village-
Communities, says: 
India has given to the world Comparative Philosophy and Com-
parative Mythology; it may yet give us a new science not less valuable 
than the sciences of language and of folk-lore. 
I hesitate to call it 
Comparative Jurisprudence because, if it ever exists, its area will be so 
much wider than the field of law. 
For India not only contains (or to 
speak more accurately, did contain) an Aryan language older than any 
other descendant of the common mother tongue, and a variety of names 
of natural objects less perfectly crystallized than elsewhere into fabulous per-
sonages, but it includes a whole world of Aryan institutions, Aryan cus-
1 Collection of fifty Upanishads rendered originally into Persian from 
Sanskrit in the 17th century 
2 Celebrated Sanskrit grammarian, circa sixth century 
OPEN LETTER 
179 
toms, Aryan laws, Aryan ideas, Aryan beliefs, in a far earlier stage of 
growth and development than any which survive beyond its borders. 
Of Indian astronomy the same historian says: 
The astronomy of the Brahmins has formed alternately the sub-
ject of excessive admiration and of misplaced contempt. ... In certain 
points the Brahmins advanced beyond Greek astronomy. 
Their fame 
spread throughout the West, and found entrance into the Chronicon 
Paschale1. 
In the 8th and 9th centuries the Arabs became their disciples. 
I again quote Sir William: 
In algebra and arithmetic the Brahmins attained to a high degree 
of proficiency independent of Western aid. To them we owe the invention 
of the numerical symbols on the decimal system. . . . The Arabs borrowed 
these figures from the Hindus, and transmitted them to Europe. . . . The 
works on mathematics and mechanical science, published in the native 
languages in India in 1867, numbered 89, and in 1882, 166. 
The medical science of the Brahmins (continues the eminent 
historian) was also an independent development. ... The specific 
diseases whose names occur in Panini's grammar indicate that medical 
studies had made progress before his time (350 B.C.). . . . Arabic medi-
cine was founded on the translations from the 
Sanskrit treatises. . . . 
European medicine down to the 17th century was based upon the Arabic. 
. . . The number of medical works published in the native languages of 
India in 1877 amounted to 130, and in 1882 to 212, besides 87 on 
natural science. 
Writing of the art of war, the writer proceeds: 
The Brahmins regarded not only medicine but also the arts of war, 
music, and architecture as supplementary parts of their divinely inspired 
knowledge. . . . The Sanskrit epics prove that strategy had attained to 
the position of a recognized science before the birth of Christ, and the 
later Agni Purana 2 devotes long sections to its systematic treatment. 
The Indian art of music was destined to exercise a wider influence. 
. . . This notation passed from the Brahmins through the Persians to 
Arabia, and was thence introduced into European music by Guido d' 
Arezzo at the beginning of the 11th century. 
On architecture the same author says: 
1 An outline of Chronology from Adam to 629 A.D., supposed to have 
been compiled in the seventh century 
2 One of the eighteen puranas or old sacred Hindu mythological works; 
it is believed to have been expounded by Agni, the god of fire, and deals 
with, among other things, ritual worship, duties of kingship and the art of 
war. 
180 
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI 
The Buddhists were the great stone-builders of India. Their monas-
teries and shrines exhibit 
the history of the art during twenty-two 
centuries, from the earliest cave structures of the rock temples to the 
latest Jain erections dazzling in stucco, over-crowded with ornament. 
It seems not improbable that the churches of Europe owe their steeples 
to the Buddhist topes. . . Hindu art has left memorials which extort 
the admiration and astonishment of our age. 
The Hindu palace architecture of Gwalior, the Indian Mahommedan 
mosques, the mausoleums of Agra and Delhi, with several of the older 
Hindu temples of Southern India, stand unrivalled for grace of outline and 
elaborate wealth of ornament. 
English decorative art in our day has borrowed largely from Indian 
forms and patterns. . . . Indian art works, when faithful to native designs, 
still obtain the highest honours at the international exhibitions of Europe. 
Here is what Andrew Carnegie in his Round the World says about 
the Taj of Agra: 
There are some subjects too sacred for analysis, or even for words. 
And I now know that there is a human structure so exquisitely fine or 
unearthly, as to lift it into this holy domain. . . . The Taj is built of 
a light creamy marble, so that it does not chill one as pure cold 
white marble does. 
It is warm and sympathetic as a woman. . . . One 
great critic has freely called the Taj a feminine structure. 
There is noth-
ing masculine about it, says he; its charms are all feminine. 
This creamy 
marble is inlaid with fine black marble lines, the entire Koran, in Arabic 
letters, it is said, being thus interwoven. . . Till the day I die, amid 
mountain streams or moonlight strolls in the forest, wherever and when-
ever the mood comes, when all that is most sacred, most elevated and 
most pure recur to shed their radiance upon the tranquil mind, there 
will be found among my treasures the memory of that lovely charm—
the Taj. 
Nor has India been without its laws, codified or otherwise. 
The Institutes of Manu have always been noted for their justice 
and precision. So much does 
Sir H. S. Maine seem to have 
been struck with their equity that he calls them "an ideal pic-
ture of that which, in the view of the Brahmins, ought to be the 
law". Mr. Pincott, writing in 1891 in The National Review, alludes 
to them as "the philosophical precepts of Manu". 
Nor have the Indians been deficient in the dramatic art. 
Goethe thus speaks of Shakuntala, the most famous Indian drama: 
Wouldst thou the young year's blossoms, and the fruits of its decline, 
And all by which the soul is charmed, enraptured, feasted, fed, 
OPEN LETTER 
181 
Wouldst thou the earth, and heaven itself in one sole name combine? 
I name thee, O Shakuntala! and all at once is said. 
Coming to the Indian character and social life, the evidence 
is voluminous. I can only give meagre extracts. 
I take the following again from Hunter's Indian Empire: 
The Greek ambassador (Megasthenes) observed with admiration the 
absence of slavery in India, and the chastity of the women and the courage 
of the men. 
In valour they excelled all other Asiatics; they required no 
locks to their doors; above all, no Indian was ever known to tell a lie. 
Sober and industrious, good farmers and skilful artisans, they scarcely ever 
had recourse to a lawsuit, and lived peaceably under their native chiefs. 
The kingly government is portrayed almost as described in Manu, with 
its hereditary castes of councillors and soldiers. . . The village system is 
well described, each little rural unit seeming to the Greek an independent 
republic (the italics are mine). 
Bishop Heber1 says of the people of India: 
So far as their natural character is concerned, I have been led to form 
on the whole a very favourable opinion. 
They are men of high and gallant 
courage, courteous, intelligent, and most eager after knowledge and Im-
provement. . . . They are sober, industrious, dutiful to their parents, and 
affectionate to their children; of tempers almost uniformly gentle and 
patient, and more easily affected by kindness and attention to their 
wants and feelings than almost any men whom I have met with. 
Sir Thomas Munro, sometime Governor of Madras, says: 
I do not exactly know what is meant by civilizing the people of India. 
In the theory and practice of good government they may be deficient, but 
if a good system of agriculture, if unrivalled manufacturers, if a capacity to 
produce what convenience and luxury demand, if the establishment of 
schools for reading and writing, if the general practice of kindness and 
hospitality, and, above all, if a scrupulous respect and delicacy towards 
the female sex, are amongst the points that denote a civilized people, 
then the Hindus are not inferior in civilization to the people of Europe. 
Sir George Birdwood gives the following opinion on the gene-
ral character of the Indians: 
They are long-suffering and patient, hardy and enduring, frugal 
and industrious, law-abiding and peace-seeking. . . . The educated and 
higher mercantile classes are honest and truthful, and loyal and trustful 
1 Reginald Heber (1783-1826); Bishop of Calcutta, established Bishop's 
College in that city; widely travelled in India. 
182 
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI 
towards the British Government, in the most absolute sense that I can 
use, and you understand the words. 
Moral truthfulness is as marked a 
characteristic of the Settia (upper) class of Bombay as of the Teutonic race 
itself. The people of India, in short, are in no intrinsic sense our inferiors, 
while in things measured by some of the false standards—false to our-
selves—we pretend to believe in, they are our superiors. 
Sir C. Trevelyan remarks that: 
They have very considerable administrative qualities, great patience, 
industry, and great acuteness and intelligence. 
Of the family relations, thus speaks Sir W. W. Hunter: 
There is simply no comparison between Englishmen and Hindus 
with respect to the place occupied by family interests and family affec-
tions in their minds. 
The love of parents for children and of children 
for parents has scarcely any counterpart in England. 
Parental and filial 
affection occupies among our Eastern fellow-citizens the place which is 
taken in this country by the passion between the sexes. 
And Mr. Pincott thinks that: 
In all social matters the English are far more fitted to sit at the 
feet of Hindus and learn as disciples than to attempt to become masters. 
Says M. Louis Jacolliot: 
Soil of ancient India, cradle of humanity, hail! Hail, venerable and 
efficient nurse, whom centuries of brutal invasions have not yet buried 
under the dust of oblivion. 
Hail, fatherland of faith, of love, of poetry, 
and of science! 
May we hail a revival of thy past in our Western future! 
Says Victor Hugo: 
These nations have made Europe, France and Germany. 
Germany 
is for the Occident that which India is for the Orient. 
Add to this the facts that India has produced a Buddha, whose 
life some consider the best and the holiest lived by a mortal, and 
some to be second only to that lived by Jesus; that India has pro-
duced an Akbar, whose policy the British Government have fol-
lowed with but few modifications; that India lost, only a few 
years ago, a Parsee Baronet who astonished not India only, but 
England also, by his munificent charities; that India has produced 
Christodas Paul, a journalist, whom Lord Elgin, the present Vice-
roy, compared with the best European journalists; that India has 
produced Justices Mahomed and Muthukrishna Aiyer 1, both Judges 
of High Courts in India, whose judgments have been pronounced 
1 The reference is to Sir T. Muthuswami Aiyer. 
OPEN LETTER 
183 
to be the ablest delivered by the judges, both European and Indian, 
who adorn the Indian Bench; and, lastly, India has in Baddruddin1, 
Banerji2, and Mehta3, orators who have on many an occasion held 
English audiences spellbound. 
Such is India. If the picture appears to you to be somewhat 
overdrawn or fanciful, it is none the less faithful. There is the 
other side. Let him who takes delight in separating, rather than 
in uniting, the two nations give the other side. Then, please, exa-
mine both with the impartiality of a Daniel, and I promise that 
there will yet remain a considerable portion of what has been said 
above untouched, to induce you to believe that India is not Africa, 
and that it is a civilized country in the truest sense of the term 
civilization. 
Before, however, I can quit this subject, I have to crave leave 
to be allowed to anticipate a possible objection. It will be said: 
"If what you say is true, the people whom you call Indians in the 
Colony are not Indians, because your remarks are not borne out 
by the practices prevailing among the people whom you call 
Indians. See how grossly untruthful they are." Everyone I have 
met with in the Colony has dwelt upon the untruthfulness of the 
Indians. To a limited extent I admit the charge. It will be very 
small satisfaction for me to show, in reply to the objection, that 
other classes do not fare much better in this respect, especially if 
and when they are placed in the position of the unfortunate 
Indians. And yet, I am afraid, I shall have to fall back upon argu-
ment of that sort. Much as I would wish them to be otherwise, I 
confess my utter inability to prove that they are more than human. 
They come to Natal on starvation wages (I mean here the in-
dentured Indians). 
They find themselves placed in a strange 
1 Badruddin Tyabji (1844-1906) ; actively associated with and de facto 
President of the Bombay Presidency Association; 
presided 
over Congress 
session at Madras (1887); Judge of Bombay High Court (1895) ; nominated to 
the Bombay Legislative Council in 1882. 
2 Surendranath Banerjea (1848-1925): Moderate politician, Member of 
the Indian National Congress deputation to Britain in 1890. 
Member of the 
Legislative Council of Bengal (1893-1901). 
Owned and edited the Bengalee. 
Under the Montford Reforms became member of the Bengal Executive Council. 
President of the Congress in 1895 and 1902. 
3 Pherozeshah Mehta (1845-1915); Indian leader, dominated the public 
life of Bombay for a long time; one of the founders of the Bombay Presidency 
Association and thrice Chairman of the Bombay Municipal Corporation. 
Member of the Bombay Legislative Council and later, of the Viceroy's Legis-
lative Council. 
One of the pioneer founders of the Indian National Congress 
in 1885; was elected to its presidentship twice, in 1890 and 1909. 
184 
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI 
position and amid uncongenial surroundings. The moment they leave 
India they remain throughout life, if they settle in the Colony, 
without any moral education. Whether they are Hindus or 
Mahommedans, they are absolutely without any moral or religious 
instruction worthy of the name. They have not learnt enough to 
educate themselves without any outside help. 
Placed thus, they 
are apt to yield to the slightest temptation to tell a lie. 
After 
some time, lying with them becomes a habit and a disease. They 
would lie without any reason, without any prospect of bettering 
themselves materially, indeed, without knowing what they are do-
ing. They reach a stage in life when their moral faculties have 
completely collapsed owing to neglect. There is also a very sad 
form of lying. They cannot dare tell the truth, even for their wan-
tonly ill-treated brother, for fear of receiving ill-treatment from 
their master. They are not philosophic enough to look with equa-
nimity on the threatened reduction in their miserable rations 
and severe corporal punishment, did they dare to give evidence 
against their master. Are these men, then, more to be despised 
than pitied? Are they to be treated as scoundrels, deserving no 
mercy, or are they to be treated as helpless creatures, badly in need 
of sympathy? Is there any class of people who would not do as 
they are doing under similar circumstances? 
But I will be asked what I can have to say in defence of the 
traders, who, too, are equally good liars. As to this, I beg to 
submit that the charge against them is without foundation, and 
that they do not lie more than the other classes do for the purposes 
of trade or law. They are very much misunderstood; in the first 
place, because they cannot speak the English language, 
and 
secondly, because the interpretation is very defective, through no 
fault of the interpreters. The interpreters are expected to perform 
the Herculean task of interpreting successfully in four languages, 
viz., Tamil, Telugu, Hindustani and Gujarati. The trading 
Indian invariably speaks Hindustani or Gujarati. 
Those who 
speak Hindustani only, speak high Hindustani. The interpreters, 
with one exception, speak the local Hindustani, which is a grotes-
que mixture of Tamil, Gujarati and other Indian languages, cloth-
ed in extremely bad Hindustani grammar. 
Very naturally, the 
interpreter has to argue with the witness before he can get at his 
meaning. While the process is going on, the judge grows impatient, 
and thinks that the witness is prevaricating. The poor inter-
preter, if questioned, true to human nature, in order to conceal 
his defective knowledge of the language, says the witness does not 
give straight answers. The poor witness has no opportunity of set-
OPEN LETTER 
185 
ting himself right. In the case of the Gujarati speakers the matter 
is still more serious. There is not a single Gujarati interpreter 
in the Courts. The interpreter, after great difficulty, manages to 
get at the sense only of what the witness is speaking. I have myself 
seen 
a Gujarati-speaking 
witness struggling 
to make himself 
understood, and the interpreter struggling to 
understand the 
Gujarati-Hindustani. Indeed, it speaks volumes for the acuteness 
of the interpreters in extracting even the sense from a forest of 
strange words. But all the while the struggle is going on, the Judge 
makes up his mind not to believe a word of what the witness says, 
and puts him down for a liar. 
III 
In order to answer the third question, "Is their present treat-
ment in accordance with the best British traditions, or with the 
principles of justice and morality, or with the principles of Chris-
tianity?", it will be necessary to enquire what their treatment is. 
I think it will be readily granted that the Indian is bitterly hated 
in the Colony. The man in the street hates him, curses him, spits 
upon him, and often pushes him off the footpath. The Press cannot 
find a sufficiently strong word in the best English dictionary to 
damn him with. Here are a few samples: "The real canker that is 
eating into the very vitals of the community"; "these parasites"; 
"wily, wretched, semi-barbarous Asiatics"; "a thing black and 
lean and a long way from clean, which they call the accursed 
Hindoo"; "he is chock-full of vice, and he lives upon rice. . . . 
I heartily cuss the Hindoo"; "squalid coolies with truthless tongues 
and artful ways". The Press almost unanimously refuses to call the 
Indian by his proper name. He is "Ramsamy"; he is "Mr. 
Sammy"; he is "Mr. Coolie"; he is "the black man". And these 
offensive epithets have become so common that they (at any rate 
one of them, "coolie") are used even in the sacred precincts of the 
Courts, as if "the coolie" were the legal and proper name to give 
to any and every Indian. The public men, too, seem to use the 
word freely. 
I have often heard the painful expression "coolie 
clerk" from the mouths of men who ought to know better. The 
expression is a contradiction in terms and is extremely offensive to 
those to whom it is applied. But then, in this Colony the Indian 
is a creature without feelings! 
The tramcars are not for the Indians. The railway officials 
may treat the Indians as beasts. No matter how clean, his very 
sight is such an offence to every white man in the Colony that 
he would object to sit, even for a short time, in the same compart-
186 
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI 
ment with the Indian. The hotels shut their doors against them. 
I know instances of respectable Indians having been denied a 
night's lodging in an hotel. Even the public baths are not for the 
Indians, no matter who they are. 
If I am to depend upon one-tenth of the reports that I have 
received with regard to the treatment of the indentured Indians 
on the various estates, it would form a terrible indictment against 
the humanity of the masters on the estates and the care taken by 
the Protector of Indian immigrants. This, however, is a subject which 
my extremely limited experience of it precludes me from making 
further remarks upon. 
The Vagrant Law is needlessly oppressive, and often puts res-
pectable Indians in a very awkward position. 
Add to this the rumours that are rife in the air, to the effect 
that they should be made, or induced, to live in Locations. It may 
be merely an intention; none the less, it is an index of the feeling 
of the European Colonists against the Indians. I beseech you to 
picture to yourself the state the Indian would be in in Natal if 
it were possible to carry out all such intentions. 
Now, is this treatment in consonance with the British tradi-
tions of justice, or morality, or Christianity? 
I would, with your permission, quote an extract from Macau-
lay, and leave it to you to answer the question as to whether 
the present treatment would have met with his approval. Speak-
ing on the subject of the treatment of the Indians, he expressed the 
following sentiments: 
We shall never consent to administer the pousta1 to a whole com-
munity, to stupefy and paralyse a great people whom God has commit-
ted to our charge, for the wretched purpose of rendering them more 
amenable to our control. 
What is that power worth which is founded on 
vice, on ignorance, and on misery, which we can hold by violating the 
most sacred duties which as governors we owe to the governed, which 
as a people blessed with far more than an ordinary measure of political 
liberty and of intellectual light we owe to a race debased by three 
thousand years of despotism and priestcraft? 
We are free, we are civilized, 
to little purpose, if we grudge to any portion of the human race an equal measure 
of freedom and civilization. 
I have but to refer you to writers like Mill, Burke, Bright, 
and Fawcett2, to further show that they, at any rate, would not give 
1 Seed of opium poppy 
2 Henry Fawcett (1833-84); statesman and professor of Political Economy 
at Cambridge 
OPEN LETTER 
187 
countenance to the treatment accorded to the Indians in the 
Colony. 
To bring a man here on starvation wages, to hold him under 
bondage, and when he shows the least signs of liberty, or, is in a 
position to live less miserably, to wish to send him back to his 
home where he would become comparatively a stranger and 
perhaps unable to earn a living, is hardly a mark of fair play 
or justice characteristic of the British nation. 
That the treatment of the Indians is contrary to the teaching 
of Christianity needs hardly any argument. The Man, who taught 
us to love our enemies and to give our cloak to the one who wanted 
the coat, and to hold out the right cheek when the left was 
smitten, and who swept away the distinction between the Jew 
and the Gentile, would never brook a disposition that causes a man 
to be so proud of himself as to consider himself polluted even by 
the touch of a fellow-being. 
IV 
The last head of the enquiry has, I believe, been sufficiently 
discussed in discussing the first. And I for one would not be much 
grieved if an experiment were tried to drive out each and every 
Indian from the Colony. In that case, I have not the slightest 
doubt that the Colonists would soon rue the day when they took 
the step and would wish they had not done it. The petty trades 
and the petty avocations of life would be left alone. The work 
for which they are specially suited would not be taken up by the 
Europeans, and the Colony would lose an immense amount of 
revenue now derived from the Indians. The climate of South 
Africa is not such as would enable the Europeans to do the work 
that they can easily do in Europe. What, however, I do submit 
with the greatest deference is this, that if the Indians must be kept 
in the Colony, then let them receive such treatment as by their 
ability and integrity they may be fit to receive, that is to say, 
give them what is their due, and what is the least that a sense 
of justice, unalloyed by partiality or prejudice, should prompt 
you to give them. 
It now remains for me only to implore you to give this matter 
your earnest consideration, and to remind you (here I mean 
especially the English) that Providence has put the English and 
the Indians together, and has placed in the hands of the former 
the destinies of the latter, and it will largely depend upon what 
every Englishman does with respect to the Indian and how he 
treats him, whether the putting together will result in an ever 
188 
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI 
lasting union brought about by broad sympathy, love, free mutual 
intercourse, and also a right knowledge of the Indian character, 
or whether the putting together will simply last so long as the Eng-
lish have sufficient resources to keep the Indians under check, and 
the naturally mild Indians have not been vexed into active oppo-
sition to the foreign yoke. I have, further, to remind you that the 
English in England have shown by their writings, speeches and 
deeds that they mean to unify the hearts of the two peoples, that 
they do not believe in colour distinctions, and that they will raise 
India with them rather than rise upon its ruins. In support of this 
I beg to refer you to Bright, Fawcett, Bradlaugh, Gladstone, Wed-
derburn, Pincott, Ripon, Reay, Northbrooke, Dufferin, and a host 
of other eminent Englishmen who represent public opinion. The 
very fact of an English constituency returning an Indian to the 
British House of Commons,1 in spite of the expressed wish to the con-
trary of the then Prime Minister, and almost the whole British 
Press, both Conservative and Liberal, congratulating the Indian 
member on the success, and expressing its approval of the unique 
event, and the whole House again, both Conservative and Liberal, 
according him a warm welcome—this fact alone, I submit, sup-
ports my statement. Will you, then, follow them, or will you strike 
out a new path? Will you promote unity, "which is the condition 
of progress", or will you promote discord, "which is the condition 
of degradation" ? 
In conclusion, I beg of you to receive the above in the same 
spirit in which it has been written. 
I have the honour to remain, 
Your obedient servant, 
M. 
K. 
GANDHI 
From a pamphlet 
