54. LETTER TO EUROPEANS2 
BEACH GROVE, 
DURBAN, 
December 19, 1894 
SIR, 
I venture to send you the enclosed for perusal, and solicit 
your opinion on the subject matter of the Open Letter. 
1 The reference is to Dadabhai Naoroji's election in 1893 from Central 
Finsbury. 
2 A printed circular letter sent by Gandhiji to Europeans in Natal 
LETTER TO "THE NATAL ADVERTISER" 
189 
Whether you be a clergyman, editor, public man, merchant 
or lawyer, the subject cannot but demand your attention. If you 
are a clergyman, inasmuch as you represent the teaching of Jesus, 
it must be your duty to see that you are in no way, directly or 
indirectly, countenancing a treatment of your fellow-beings that 
would not be pleasing to Jesus. If you are an editor of a news-
paper, the responsibility is equally great. Whether you are using 
your influence as a journalist to the evolution or degradation of 
humanity will depend upon whether you are encouraging division 
among class and class or striving after union. The same remarks 
will apply to you as a public man. If you are a merchant or law-
yer, you have, then too, a duty to discharge towards your customers 
and clients from whom you derive a considerable pecuniary ad-
vantage. It is for you to treat them as dogs or fellow-beings demand-
ing your sympathy in the cruel persecution that they are put to 
owing to the prevalent ignorance about the Indians in the Colony. 
Coming as you do in comparatively close contact with them, you 
have, no doubt, the opportunity and incentive to study them. 
Looked at from a sympathetic standpoint, they would perhaps show 
themselves to you as they have been seen by scores and hundreds 
of Europeans who had the opportunity to study them, and who 
used it aright. 
Your opinion is solicited with a view to ascertaining if there 
are many Europeans in the Colony who would actively sympathize 
with and feel for the Indians in the Colony, assuming that their 
treatment is not all that could be desired. 
I am, Sir, 
Your faithful servant, 
M. 
K. GANDHI 
From a copy: S.N. 201 
