55. LETTER TO "THE NATAL ADVERTISER" 
DURBAN, 
January 21, 1895 
TO 
THE EDITOR 
The Natal Advertiser 
SIR, 
You will oblige me by letting me draw the attention of 
your readers to the notice that appears in your advertisement 
190 
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI 
columns about the Esoteric Christian Union and the London 
Vegetarian Society. 
The system represented by the Union establishes the unity 
and common source of all the great religions of the world, and 
points out, as the books advertised will amply show, the utter 
inadequacy of materialism which boasts of having given the world 
a civilization which was never witnessed before, and which is 
alleged to have done the greatest good to humanity, all the while 
conveniently forgetting that its greatest achievements are the in-
vention of the most terrible weapons of destruction, the awful 
growth of anarchism, the frightful disputes between capital and 
labour and the wanton and diabolical cruelty inflicted on inno-
cent, dumb, living animals in the name of science, "falsely so 
called". 
There seem to be, however, signs of reaction setting in —the al-
most phenomenal success of the Theosophical Society, the gradual 
acceptance by the clergy of the doctrine of holiness, and what is 
more, the acceptance by Professor Max Muller of the doctrine of 
reincarnation so conclusively demonstrated in 
The Perfect Way, 
his statement that it was gaining ground among the thinking minds 
in England and elsewhere, and the publication of The Unknown 
Life of Jesus Christ. 
It is not possible to secure these works in 
S. Africa. My knowledge of them is, therefore, confined to their 
reviews. All these and many such facts are, I submit, unmistakable 
signs of a return from the materialistic tendencies, which have 
made us so cruelly selfish, to the unadulterated esoteric teachings 
of not only Jesus Christ, but also of Buddha, Zoroaster and Maho-
med, who are no longer so generally denounced by the civilized 
world as false prophets, but whose and Jesus's teachings are be-
ginning to be acknowledged to be complementary of one another. 
I regret that I am unable yet to advertise books on vege-
tarianism, as they have, by mistake, been forwarded to India, and 
will, therefore, take some time before they arrive in Durban. I 
may, however, state one valuable fact with regard to the efficacy 
of vegetarianism. 
There is no more potent instrument of evil 
than drunkenness, and I may be allowed to say that all those who 
suffer from the craving for drink, but would like really to be free 
from the curse, have only to give a trial for at least one month to 
a diet chiefly consisting of brown bread and oranges or grapes, to 
secure an entire freedom from the craving. I have myself carried 
on a series of experiments, and can testify that on a vegetarian 
diet, without any condiments and consisting of a liberal supply of 
juicy fresh fruits, I have lived comfortably, without tea, coffee, or 
LETTER TO "THE NATAL ADVERTISER" 
191 
cocoa, and even water, for days together. Hundreds in England 
have become vegetarian for this reason, and having once been in-
veterate tipplers, have now reached a stage when the very smell 
of grog or whisky is an offence to their tastes. Dr. B. W. Richard-
son, in his Food for Man, recommends pure vegetarianism as a cure 
for drunkenness. In a comparatively hot country like Natal, where 
there is a plentiful supply of fruits and vegetables, a bloodless diet 
should prove very beneficial in every way, apart from its immea-
surable superiority to flesh foods on grounds scientific, sanitary, 
economic, ethical and spiritual. 
It is, perhaps, needless to mention that the sale of E.C.U. 
books is not at all a money-making concern. In certain cases the 
books have even been given away. They will be gladly lent in 
some cases. I shall be very happy to correspond with any of your 
readers who may want any further information, either about the 
E.C.U. or the L.V.S., or to have a quiet chat on these (to me 
at any rate) momentous questions. 
I would conclude with what Rev. John Pulsford, D.D., has 
to say with regard to the teaching of the E.C.U.: 
It is impossible for a spiritually intelligent reader to doubt that these 
teachings were received from within the astral veil. 
They are full of the 
concentrated and compact wisdom 
of the Holy Heavens, and of God. 
If the Christians knew their own religion, they would find in these price-
less records Lord Christ and His vital process abundantly illustrated and 
confirmed. 
That such communications are possible, and are permitted 
to be given to the world, is a sign, and a most promising sign, of our age. 
I am, etc., 
M. K. 
GANDHI 
AGENT FOR 
THE ESOTERIC CHRISTIAN UNION 
& 
THE LONDON VEGETARIAN SOCIETY 
The Natal Advertiser, 1-2-1895 
