58. LETTER TO "THE NATAL WITNESS"1 
DURBAN, 
March 23, 1895 
TO 
THE EDITOR 
The Natal Witness 
SIR, 
I trust, in the interests of justice, you will allow me to make a 
few remarks on your report of the conversation that took place 
between Sir Walter Wragg and Mr. Tatham with regard to a point 
of Mahommedan Law, in your issue of the 22nd instant. 
1 This was with reference to the following report in The Natal Witness, 
22-3-1895 : 
Mr. Tatham applied to the Supreme Court yesterday for confirmation of 
the Master's report in the intestate estate of Hassan Dawjee, and remarked 
that a plan of distribution, prepared by Mr. Gandhi, barrister, had been em-
bodied in the report, and was framed according to Mahommedan Law. 
SIR WALTER WRAGG: The only thing about this is that Mr. Gandhi knows 
nothing of Mahommedan Law. 
He is as great a stranger to Mahommedan 
Law as a Frenchman. 
For what he has stated he would have to go to a 
book as you would; of his own knowledge he knows nothing. 
Mr. Tatham said that a plan of distribution had been obtained from the 
priests and from Mr. Gandhi. 
Where else they were to go he did not know. 
They had exhausted all the expert evidence available. 
SIR WALTER WRAGG: The portion which Mr. Gandhi states should go to 
the brother of the deceased, should, according to Mahommedan Law, go to 
the poor. 
Mr. Gandhi is a Hindu and knows his own faith, of course, but he 
knows nothing of Mahommedan Law. 
MR. TATHAM: The question is whether we shall take Mr. Gandhi's view 
or the priests'. 
SIR WALTER WRAGG: You must take the priests'. 
When the brother can 
show that he represents the poor he will be entitled to 5/24ths, as stated 
by Mr. Gandhi. 
I-13 
194 
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI 
I have ventured to trespass upon your courtesy, not because 
I want to defend myself, but because of the decision of 
the 
Supreme Court, which, I believe, with all due respect to Sir Walter 
Wragg, is based upon an erroneous view of the Mahommedan Law, 
and would vitally affect a large portion of the Indian Colonists. 
Were I a Mahommedan, I should be very sorry to be judged by 
a Mahommedan whose sole qualification is that he is born a Mahom-
medan. It is a revelation that the Mahommedans know the 
law intuitively, and that a non-Mahommedan never dare give an 
opinion on a point of Mahommedan Law. 
The decision (if your report is correct) that the brother will 
be entitled to his 5/24ths only after he "can show that he re-
presents the poor", is, I am afraid, according to the Mahommedan 
Law administered in India and revealed in the Koran, subversive of 
that law. I have carefully gone through the chapters on "Inheri-
tance" in Macnaughten's Mahomedan Law (which, by the way, is 
edited by a non-Mahommedan Indian, and which Messrs Binns 
and Mason, in their report published after their return from India, 
say is the book considered to be one of the best on that law), and 
have also gone through that portion of the Koran which relates to 
the subject, and in them I find not one word with regard to the 
poor being entitled to any part of the inheritance of a deceased 
Moslem. If the Koran and the book above mentioned are any 
authority on that law, then not only is there no portion to which 
the poor are entitled in the case in question, but under no circum-
stances are the poor entitled to any part of an intestate estate. 
I 
hope to be able to show that the brother (it should really be the 
half-brother), when he takes anything under that law, takes it in 
his own right, and takes it because he is a brother. 
It is likely that His Lordship, when he was talking about an 
inheritance, was actually but unconsciously thinking of alms-
giving, which is incumbent upon every Mahommedan. It is one of 
their articles of faith. But the principle that guides almsgiving 
during life does not obtain in cases of distribution of inheritance. 
A Mahommedan, by giving alms during his lifetime, earns for him-
self heaven or a respectable place therein. Alms given out of 
his estate by the State after his death can surely do him no 
spiritual good, because it is not his act. After a Moslem's death 
it is the relatives who have a prior, nay exclusive, claim upon his 
estate. 
Says the Koran: 
We have appointed unto everyone kindred to inherit part of what 
their parents and relations shall leave after their deaths. 
LETTER TO "THE NATAL WITNESS" 
195 
The law says: 
There belong to the property of a person deceased four successive 
duties: 
first, 
his funeral ceremony and burial without superfluity of 
expense, yet without deficiency; next the discharge of his just debts from 
the whole of his remaining effects; then the payment of his legacies out 
of a third of what remains after his debts are paid; and lastly, the distri-
bution of the residue among his successors. 
The successors are thus described: 
1. Legal sharers; 2. residuaries; 3. distant kindred; 4. successors by 
contract; 5. acknowledged kindred; 6. universal legatee; 7. Crown. 
"Legal sharers" are defined as "all those persons for whom 
specific shares have been appointed or ordained in the sacred text, 
the traditions, or with general assent", and according to the table 
enumerating the 12 classes of sharers, include half-brothers also. 
"Residuaries" are "all persons for whom no share has been ap-
pointed, and who take the residue after the sharers have been satis-
fied, or the whole estate when there are no sharers". It should 
here be noted that some legal sharers are as such, under certain 
conditions, excluded, and then rank as residuaries. 
"Distant 
kindred" are "all relations who are neither sharers nor residuaries". 
"After the sharers are satisfied, if there remains a residue of the 
property left by the deceased, it is to be divided among the next class 
of heirs called residuaries. If there be no residuaries, the residue will 
revert to the sharers in proportion to their shares." 
I would not occupy your valuable space by giving definitions 
of the other successors. Suffice it to say that they do not include 
the poor at all, and that they can "take" only after the first three 
classes are exhausted. 
The residuaries in their own right include, among others, 
"the 'offspring' of the father of the deceased, i.e., brothers, con-
sanguine brothers, and their sons, how low soever". 
Rule 12 of 
Section 1 says: "It is a general rule that a brother shall take double 
the share of a sister. The exception to it is in the case of brothers 
and sisters by the same mother only, but by different fathers." 
And Rule 25, Section 11, says: "Where there are daughters or 
son's daughters and no brothers, the sisters take what remains after 
the daughters or son's daughters have realized their shares, such 
residue being half should there be only one daughter or son's 
daughter, and one third should there be two or more." The two 
rules read together help us materially to determine the share the 
brother gets in the case in point. 
196 
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI 
In the typical examples given in the book I have been quot-
ing from, I find the following with its solution: "Example 7. Hus-
band, daughter, brother and three sisters." 
The solution need 
not be given fully. The brother as a residuary in his own right gets 
2/20ths. 
It will then be seen from the above that brothers, and in their 
absence, half-brothers, rank either as sharers or residuaries in their 
own right, and, therefore, with the greatest deference to 
Sir 
Walter's opinion in the case in question, the brother "takes", if 
he does at all, in his own right and not as representing the poor, and if he 
does not "take" (a thing that cannot happen in such a case if the 
law is to be respected), the residue "reverts" to the sharers. 
But the report says that the priest and I differ. 
If you elimi-
nate the" I" and put "the law" instead (for I simply said what the 
law was), I would venture to say, the priest and the law should 
never differ, and if they do, it is the priest and not the law that 
goes to the wall. In this case, however, the priest and I do not 
differ if the distribution in the report sent to me by Mr. Tatham 
was the one approved by the priest, as it seems to have been, ac-
cording to his letter of advice. 
The priest says not a word about 
the half-brother taking as representing the poor. 
Lastly, after I saw the report, I saw purposely some Mahom-
medan gentlemen who ought to know the law according to Sir 
Walter, and they were surprised when I told them about the deci-
sion. They, without even taking time to consider—the thing ap-
peared to them so plain and clear—said, "The poor never take 
anything from an intestate estate. The half-brother as such should 
have his share." 
The decision then, I submit, is contrary to the Mahommedan 
Law, the priest's opinion, and other Mahommedan gentlemen. It 
will be a manifest hardship if the portions rightly belonging to the 
relations of a deceased Mahommedan are to be locked up until they 
can show that "they represent the poor"—a condition never con-
templated by the law or sanctioned by Mahommedan usage. 
I am, etc., 
M. K. 
GANDHI 
The Natal Witness, 28-3-1895 
