59. 
MEMORIAL TO AGENT, PRETORIA1 
PRETORIA, 
April 16, 1895 
TO 
HIS HONOUR, SIR JACOBUS DE WET, K.C.M.G., 
HER MAJESTY'S AGENT, PRETORIA 
THE 
MEMORIAL 
OF 
TAYOB 
KHAN 
AND 
ABDOOL 
GANI2 
OF 
PRETORIA AND HAJEE HABIB HAJEE DADA OF JOHANNESBURG 
WHO ACT AS A COMMITTEE ON BEHALF OF THE BRITISH 
INDIAN 
MERCHANTS 
IN 
THIS 
REPUBLIC 
We respectfully request Your Honour to place yourself in 
communication with His Excellency the High Commissioner, in 
order to ascertain whether Her Majesty's Government will be satis-
fied with the Award given by the Arbitrator in the recent arbi-
tration held at Bloemfontein in the Orange Free State, between 
Her Majesty's Government and the Government of the South 
African Republic, on the Indian question. 
As Your Honour is 
aware, the Arbitrator has decided that Law 3 of 18853, as amen-
ded by Volksraad's4 Besluit of 1886, must be enforced by this 
Government, and that in the event of any dispute or difference as 
to the interpretation of that law, the High Court of this Republic 
must decide such difference. 
1 This was enclosed with Despatch No. 204 of April 29, 
1895 from the 
High Commissioner to the South African Republic to the Principal Secretary 
of State for the Colonies. 
2 Partner and manager of the firm of Mahomed Cassim Camroodeen 
in Johannesburg 
3 A Transvaal law; this applied to "the so-called Coolies, Arab, Malay 
and Mahommedan subjects of the Turkish Empire". 
It rendered them in-
capable of obtaining extended citizenship rights and of owning fixed property 
in the Republic. 
An exception was later made in the case of the "Coolies" 
who could, as sanctioned by Volksraad resolution of January 1887, own fixed 
property in specified streets, wards and Locations on grounds of sanitation. 
A further Volksraad resolution, in 1893, laid down that all Asiatics should 
be enforced to live and trade in the Locations. 
Trade could be carried on 
by registration and payment of a fee of £3. 
The law was considered to be 
in contravention of the London Convention. 
4 Sometimes abbreviated to Raad, 
South African (Dutch) word for 
National Legislative Assembly in the Transvaal and the Orange Free State 
198 
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI 
In one of the Green books, No. 21894, pages 31 and 35, put in 
at the above-mentioned arbitration by the Government of this 
Republic, statements are made to the effect that His Honour the 
Chief Justice, in giving judgment in a certain application before 
the High Court by Ismael Suliman and Co.,1 held that no difference 
could be made between places where business is carried on and 
where Indians reside. In view of these facts, we respectfully sub-
mit, without in any way impugning the High Court, that it would 
be a foregone conclusion, if the statements referred to above as 
to the judgment of the Chief Justice be correct, that the judgment 
of the Court in any case submitted to it under the above quoted 
law would be against the Indian subjects of Her Majesty in this 
Republic. As, therefore, the Arbitrator did not decide the question 
submitted to him in terms of the Deed of Submission, but practi-
cally left it to the decision of the High Court of this Republic, we 
would respectfully submit that the Arbitrator did not decide the 
question in terms of the reference to him. We, therefore, respect-
fully request Your Honour to communicate with Her Majesty's 
Government and ascertain whether they will be satisfied with 
the above Award and acquiesce therein. 
TAYOB HAJEE KHAN MOHAMED 
ABDOOL GANI 
HAJEE HABIB HAJEE DADA 
Colonial Office Records No. 417, Vol. 148 
1 In this case Ismail Suliman, an Arab trader, in August 1888, was 
denied a trading licence to carry on business except in a Location. Arbitration 
by the Chief Justice of Orange Free State recognized the right of the South 
African Republic to enforce Law 3 of 1885 subject to interpretation by the 
country's Tribunals. 
The Supreme Court of the Transvaal however reversed 
the judgment later, and held that the Government had no power under that 
law to withhold licences from Asiatics. 
