60. 
PETITION TO NATAL LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY1 
[DURBAN, 
Before May 5, 1895] 
TO 
THE HONOURABLE 
THE 
SPEAKER AND 
MEMBERS 
OF THE 
LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF THE 
COLONY OF NATAL 
THE PETITION OF THE UNDERSIGNED INDIANS 
RESIDING IN THE COLONY OF NATAL 
HUMBLY SHEWETH THAT: 
Your Petitioners, as representing the Indians in this Colony, 
hereby respectfully approach your Honourable Assembly with 
regard to the Indian Immigration Law Amendment Bill now 
before you for consideration. 
Your Petitioners respectfully submit that so much of the Bill 
which provides for re-indenture and imposition of a tax in default 
of re-indenture, is manifestly unjust, entirely uncalled for and in 
direct opposition to the fundamental principles upon which the 
British Constitution is based. 
That the Bill is manifestly unjust it does not need, your 
Petitioners submit, many words to prove. To raise the maximum 
term of indenture from five years to an indefinite period is in it-
self unjust, because it puts in the way of the masters of the in-
dentured Indians greater temptations to oppression or harshness. 
No matter how humane the masters may be in the Colony, they 
will always remain human. 
And your Petitioners need hardly 
point out what human nature is when selfish considerations guide 
one's actions. Moreover, the Bill, your Petitioners venture to say, 
is an absolutely one-sided arrangement, for, while it shows every 
consideration to the employer, it gives practically nothing in re-
turn to the employee. 
The Bill is, your Petitioners submit, uncalled for because no 
reasons exist for its introduction. It is not meant to help the 
Colony out of a pecuniary crash or help forward any industry. 
On the other hand, it was because it was recognized that the in-
dustries, for which the Indian labour was specially required, no 
longer required any extraordinary aid that the £10,000 vote was 
1 The petition was published in The Natal Advertiser, 5-5-1895. 
200 
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI 
abolished only last year. 
It is then evident that there is no real 
need for such legislation. 
To show that the Bill is in direct opposition to the funda-
mental principles of the British Constitution, your Petitioners 
humbly refer your Honourable Assembly to the whole course of 
the great events during the last century in which Britain has play-
ed a prominent part. Forced labour, from the grossest form of 
slavery to the mildest form of veth1, has always been repugnant 
to the British traditions, and has everywhere, so far as practical, 
been abolished. Indentured labour exists in Assam as it does in 
this Colony. It was only a short time ago when it was admitted 
by Her Majesty's Government, in reference to such labour in that 
country, that the indentured labour was an evil to be counte-
nanced only as long as it was absolutely necessary to support or 
promote an important industry, and to be removed at the first 
suitable opportunity. Your Petitioners respectfully submit that the 
Bill under consideration violates the above principle. 
If the proposed extension of the term of indenture is thus 
(your Petitioners hope they have shown to your Honourable As-
sembly's satisfaction) unjust, uncalled for, and opposed to the 
fundamental principles of the British Constitution, the proposed 
imposition of a tax is more so. It has long been acknowledged as 
an axiomatic truth that taxation is meant only for the purposes of 
revenue. It will not for a moment be said, your Petitioners 
humbly think, that the proposed tax is meant for any such purpose. 
The proposed taxation is avowedly meant to drive the Indian out 
of the Colony after he has finished his indenture. 
It will, there-
fore, be a prohibitive tax, and conflict with the principles of Free 
Trade. 
It will moreover inflict, your Petitioners fear, an unwarranted 
wrong on the indentured Indians, 
because for an indentured 
Indian, who has severed all connection with India and come down 
to the Colony with his family, to go back and hope to earn a 
livelihood is almost an utter impossibility. Your Petitioners crave 
leave to mention from their own experience that, as a rule, It is 
only those Indians who cannot find work to keep body and soul 
together in India who come to the Colony under indenture. The 
very fabric of the Indian society is such that the Indian, in the first 
place, does not leave his home, and when once he is driven to do 
so, it is hopeless for him to return to India and expect to earn 
bread, much less to make a fortune. 
1 Forced, unpaid labour 
PETITION TO LORD RIPON 
201 
It is an admitted fact that the Indian labour is indispensable 
to the prosperity of the Colony. If so, your Petitioners submit that 
the indentured Indians, who so materially help forward the pros-
perity of the Colony, are entitled to better consideration. 
It need hardly be mentioned that the Bill is a piece of class 
legislation and that it accentuates and encourages the prejudice 
that exists against Indians in the Colony, and thus would widen 
the gulf between one class of British subjects and another. 
Your 
Petitioners, therefore, humbly pray that your Honourable Assembly 
will come to the conclusion that that portion of the Bill which 
contemplates re-indenture and the imposition of a tax in default 
of re-indenture is not such as could be considered favourably by 
your Honourable Assembly, and for this act of justice and mercy, 
your Petitioners shall for ever pray, etc., etc. 
ABDULLA HAJI ADAM 
AND SEVERAL OTHERS 
From a photostat: S.N. 434 
