61. PETITION TO LORD RIPON1 
PRETORIA, 
SOUTH AFRICAN REPUBLIC, 
[Before May 5, 1895]2 
TO 
HIS EXCELLENCY THE RIGHT HONOURABLE THE MARQUIS OF 
RIPON, 
HER 
MAJESTY'S 
PRINCIPAL 
SECRETARY 
OF 
STATE FOR THE COLONIES, LONDON 
THE PETITION 
OF 
THE BRITISH INDIANS RESIDING IN 
THE SOUTH AFRICAN REPUBLIC 
HUMBLY SHEWETH THAT: 
Your Petitioners respectfully venture to approach Your Excel-
lency in connection with their position in the S. A. R., especially 
as affected by the Award lately given by the Chief Justice of 
the Orange Free State in the Indian Arbitration Case. 
2. Your Petitioners, whether as traders, shopkeepers' assis-
tants, hawkers, cooks, waiters, or labourers, are scattered over the 
whole of the Transvaal, though the greatest number is settled in 
1 This was forwarded by Sir Jacobus de Wet to the High Commissioner 
at Cape Town on May 30, 1895. 
2 Vide "Letter to M. C. Camroodeen", 5-5-1895. 
202 
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI 
Johannesburg and Pretoria. Of traders there are nearly 200 whose 
liquidated assets would amount to nearly £100,000. 
Of these 
about three firms import goods directly from England, Durban, 
Port Elizabeth, India, and other places, and have thus branches 
in other parts of the world whose existence mainly depends upon 
their Transvaal businesses. The rest are small vendors having stores 
in different places. There are nearly 2,000 hawkers in the Re-
public who buy goods and hawk them about, while those of your 
Petitioners who are labourers are employed as general servants in 
European houses or hotels. 
They number about 1,500 men, of 
whom about 1,000 live at Johannesburg. 
3. Your Excellency's Petitioners, before entering into a dis-
cussion of their precarious position in the State, would with the 
greatest deference venture to point out that your Petitioners, whose 
interests were at stake, were never once consulted as to the arbi-
tration, that the moment the question of arbitration was broached, 
your Petitioners protested both against the principle of arbitration 
and against the choice of the Arbitrator. Your Petitioners conveyed 
the protest verbally to His Honour the British Agent at Pretoria, 
who, your Petitioners here take the opportunity to say, has always 
been most courteous and attentive to those of your Petitioners who 
had occasion to wait upon him from time to time in connection 
with the grievances of the Indians in the Transvaal. Your Peti-
tioners would also draw Your Excellency's attention to the fact 
that even a written protest was sent to Her Majesty's High Com-
missioner at Cape Town. However, your Petitioners by dwelling 
upon the matter do not at all wish to cast the slightest reflection 
on the highmindedness or probity of the learned Chief Justice of 
the Orange Free State or to question the wisdom of Her Majes-
ty's officers. 
Having known the bias of the learned Chief Justice 
against the Indians, your Petitioners thought, and still humbly 
venture to think, that he could not, in spite of his most strenu-
ous efforts to do otherwise, bring to bear upon the question an equi-
balanced judgment which is so necessary to a right and proper 
perception of the facts of a case. Judges having a previous know-
ledge of cases have been known to refrain from deciding them, lest 
they should unconsciously be led away by preconceived notions 
or prejudices. 
4. The reference to the learned Arbitrator in the case sub-
mitted on behalf of Her Majesty's Government runs thus: 
The Arbitrator shall be free to decide either in favour of the 
claims put forward by Her Majesty's Government or by the 
South African Republic, or to lay down such interpretation of the 
PETITION TO LORD RIPON 
203 
said Ordinances, read together with the Despatches referring to 
the question, as shall appear to him to be correct. 
5. The Award as published in the papers is as follows: 
(a) 
The claims of Her Majesty's Government and of the Government 
of the South African Republic respectively are disallowed, save and 
except to the extent and degree following, that is to say: 
(b) 
The South African Republic is bound and entitled in its treatment 
of Indian and other Asiatic traders, being British subjects, to give full 
force and effect to Law No. 3 of 1885, enacted, and in the year 
1886 amended by the Volksraad of the South African Republic, sub-
ject (in case of objections being raised by or on behalf of any such 
persons to any such treatment as not being in accordance with the 
provisions of the said law as amended) to sole and exclusive inter-
pretation in the ordinary course by the Tribunals of the country. 
6. Now, your Petitioners humbly submit that the above Award 
not being in terms of the reference is void, and that Her Majesty's 
Government is not, therefore, bound by it. The very object with 
which the arbitration was decided upon is, it is respectfully point-
ed out, frustrated. The reference leaves it to the Arbitrator either 
to allow the claims of one of the two Governments or to lay down 
such interpretation of the Ordinances as may appear to him to be 
correct, regard being had to the Despatches referring to the 
question. Instead of interpreting, the learned Arbitrator has dele-
gated the interpretation, and in delegating has, moreover, limited 
the delegation to such persons as, by the very nature of their posi-
tion, cannot possibly avail themselves of the procedure and evi-
dence that could be availed of, nay that was expressly stipulated 
to be availed of, by the Arbitrator, and that would tend to enable 
them to lay down such an interpretation as would be just and 
equitable, though, perhaps, not strictly legal. 
7. The Award, your Petitioners submit, is invalid on two 
grounds. First, because the Arbitrator had delegated his function, 
which no arbitrator in the world can do. Secondly, the Arbitrator 
has failed to keep to the reference, inasmuch as he has left undeci-
ded the question that he was expressly called upon to decide. 
8. The object, it would seem, was not to have the question of 
interpretation decided in a law-court, but to terminate the ques-
tion once for all. Had not such been the case, Her Majesty's Gov-
ernment would never have entered into the voluminous correspon-
dence with regard to the question of interpretation as found in the 
Transvaal Green books, Nos. 1 and 2, 1894. 
The question that 
was to be, and your Petitioners submit can only be, decided diplo-
matically and politically has been left, if the Award is to be valid, 
204 
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI 
to be decided judicially only. And if it is true that the Chief Jus-
tice of the Transvaal has already expressed his opinion in the case 
presented on behalf of the Transvaal Government, the decision 
of the question is almost a foregone conclusion. To prove that 
this is so, your Petitioners refer Your Excellency to newspapers of 
current dates, especially The Johannesburg Times of 27th April 
1895 (weekly edition). 
9. But your Petitioners' appeal to Your Excellency is 
on 
higher and broader grounds; your Petitioners have every confi-
dence that the question that affects thousands of Her Majesty's 
subjects, on a proper solution of which depend the bread and butter 
of hundreds of British subjects, and a technical solution of which 
may bring ruin to hundreds of homes and may leave them penni-
less, will not be left to be decided merely in a court of law where 
everybody's hands are tied down, and where such considerations 
find no place. So far as the traders are concerned, if the contention 
of the Transvaal Government is ultimately upheld, it means abso-
lute ruin to them, and not only to them personally, but to their 
families and relations and servants, both in India and the Trans-
vaal, who are dependent upon them. It is impossible for some of 
your Petitioners, who have been trading for a long time in the 
Transvaal, to seek "pastures new" and manage to keep body and 
soul together, if they are driven out of their present position 
through no fault of their own, but merely, as will be seen present-
ly, because of the misrepresentation of a few interested persons. 
10. The gravity of the question and the immense interests that 
are at stake are your Petitioners' excuse for the follow.ing some-
what lengthy resume of their position, and for humbly soliciting 
Your Excellency's undivided attention to it. 
11. The unfortunate departure from the 14th Clause of the 
Convention of 18811, which protects equally the interests of all persons 
other than Natives, has originated and been countenanced in and 
by the assumption that the Indian settlers in the Transvaal do not 
observe proper sanitation and is based on the misrepresentations of 
certain interested persons. It has been emphatically laid down by 
Her Majesty's Government throughout the correspondence about 
the Law 3 of 1885 that separate streets might be set apart for the 
Indians in the interests of public health, but that they cannot be 
compelled to trade in certain fixed parts only of the towns. After 
the Law 3 of 1885 was strenuously opposed for some time, the 
then High Commissioner, Sir H. Robinson, in withdrawing opposi-
1 This should be 1884; vide footnote on the following page. 
PETITION TO LORD RIPON 
205 
tion to the amended Law of 1886, says in his letter (26th Septem-
ber, 1886, page 46, Green book No. 1, 1894): "Although the amen-
ded law is still a contravention of the 14th Article of the Conven-
tion of London1 I shall not advise Her Majesty's Government to 
offer further opposition to it in view of Your Honour's opinion 
that it is necessary for the protection of the public health." Even the 
reference to the Arbitrator and the Law 3 of 1885 shows clearly 
that the departure from the Convention was to be assented to 
only for sanitary reasons. 
12. Your Petitioners hereby enter their most respectful, but 
emphatic protest against the assumption that there exist sanitary 
reasons for such a departure; your Petitioners hope to be able to 
show that no such reasons exist. 
13. Your Petitioners append hereto three certificates from doc-
tors which would speak for themselves and which show that their 
dwellings are in no way inferior to those of the Europeans, from a 
sanitary point of view (App. A,B,C). Your Petitioners challenge 
comparison of their own dwellings with those of the Europeans 
who have theirs in their immediate neighbourhood. For, it so 
happens in Pretoria that, side by side with some of your Petitioners' 
houses and stores, are situated also the houses and stores of Euro-
peans. 
14. The following unsolicited testimonial will speak for it-
self. On the 16th October, 1885, Mr. Mitchell, the then Joint Gene-
ral Manager of the Standard Bank, writes thus to the High Com-
missioner, Sir H. Robinson: 
It may not be deemed out of place if I add that they (the Indian 
traders) are, within my knowledge, in all respects orderly, industrious and 
respectable people, and some among them are merchants of wealth and 
position, having establishments on a large scale in Mauritius, Bombay 
and elsewhere 
(Green book No. 1, p. 37). 
15. About 35 European firms of repute 
distinctly declare that the aforementioned Indian merchants, the majo-
rity of whom come from Bombay, keep their business places as well as 
their residences in a clean and proper sanitary state, in fact, just as 
good as the European (App. D). 
1 London Convention, signed on February 27, 1884, between the Boers 
and the British. Article XIV assured all persons, other than Natives, full liberty 
of entry, travel, residence, ownership of property and trade in the South 
African Republic (or the Transvaal). 
The Boer Government tried to interpret 
the word 'Natives' to include the Indians, but this view was rejected by the 
British Government. 
206 
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI 
16. It is true, however, that this does not appear in the news-
papers. The public Press thinks that your Petitioners are "filthy 
vermin". 
The representations to the Volksraad say the same 
thing. The reasons are obvious. Your Petitioners, not knowing the 
English language so well as to be able to take part in such dis-
cussions, or even to keep themselves informed of all the misrepresen-
tations about them, are not always in a position to refute such 
statements. It was only when they became aware that their very 
existence was at stake that they went to the European firms and 
doctors to give their opinion about their sanitary habits. 
17. But your Petitioners claim also a right to speak for them-
selves, and they have no hesitation in stating deliberately that 
collectively, though their dwellings may appear uncouth and are 
certainly without much adornment, they are in no way inferior 
to the European dwellings from a sanitary point of view. And as 
to their personal habits, they confidently assert that they use more 
water and bathe much oftener than the Europeans residing in the 
Transvaal whom they come in frequent connection with. Nothing 
can be further from your Petitioners' wish than to set up compa-
risons, or to try to show themselves superior to their European 
brethren. Force of circumstances only has driven them to such a 
course. 
18. The two elegant petitions at pp. 19-21 of the Green book 
No. 2, which pray for an exclusion of all Asiatics, and contain 
wholesale denunciation of all the Asiatics, Chinamen, etc., render 
it absolutely necessary to state what has been stated above. The 
first petition enumerates terrible vices, peculiar, as alleged therein, 
to Chinamen, and the second, referring to the first, includes in the 
denunciation all the Asiatics. Speaking specifically of Chinese, 
Coolies and other Asiatics, the second petition refers to "the dan-
gers to which the whole community is exposed by the spread of 
leprosy, syphilis, and the like loathsome diseases engendered by 
the filthy habits and immoral practices of these people". 
19. Without entering into further comparison, and without 
entering into the question as affecting the Chinamen, your Peti-
tioners most emphatically state that the above charges are entirely 
without grounds so far as your Petitioners are concerned. 
20. To show how far the interested agitators have gone, your 
Petitioners quote below an excerpt from a memorial presented to 
the Volksraad of the Orange Free State, a copy of which was sent 
with approval by the Pretoria Chamber of Commerce to the 
Transvaal Government: 
PETITION TO LORD RIPON 
207 
As these men enter the State without wives or female relatives the 
result is obvious. 
Their religion teaches them to consider all women as 
soulless and Christians as natural prey (Green book No. 1, 1894, p. 30). 
21. Your Petitioners ask, can there be a grosser libel on the 
great faiths prevailing in India or a greater insult to the Indian 
nation? 
22. Such are the statements which, it will be noticed from the 
Green books referred to, have been used to make out a case against 
the Indians. 
23. The real and the only reason has all along been suppress-
ed. The only reason for compelling your Petitioners [to live in Loca-
tions] or putting every obstacle in the way of your Petitioners earn-
ing a decent livelihood is the trade jealousy. Your Petitioners, i.e., 
those who are traders—and the whole crusade is practically against 
them—have, by their competition and owing to their temperate 
and thrifty habits, been able to reduce the prices of the necessaries 
of life. This does not suit the European traders who would make 
very large profits. It is a notorious fact that your Petitioners, who 
are traders, are almost without exception teetotallers. Their habits 
are simple, and thus they are content to make small profits. This 
and this only is the reason of the opposition against them, and 
this is well known to everybody in South Africa. That this is so 
can be gathered from the public Press of South Africa, which 
sometimes becomes frank and shows the hatred in its true light. 
Thus, dealing with the "Coolie question", as it is contemptuously 
called, after showing that the real "Coolie" is indispensable to 
South Africa, The Natal Advertiser of the 15th September, 1893, 
thus delivers itself: 
The sooner the steps are taken to suppress, and if possible to expel, 
the Indian trader the better. These latter are the real canker that is eat-
ing into the very vitals of the community. 
24. Again, the Press, 
the Government organ in the Trans-
vaal, dealing with this question, says: "If the Asiatic invasion is not 
stopped in time, European shopkeepers must be driven to the 
wall, as they have been in Natal, and in many parts of the Cape 
Colony." The whole of the above article is interesting reading, 
and is a fair sample of the feeling of the Europeans towards colour 
in South Africa. Although the whole tenor of it betrays fear on the 
grounds of competition, there occurs this characteristic passage: 
If we are to be swamped by these people, trade by Europeans will 
be impossible, and we shall one and all become subjected to the horrible 
208 
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI 
danger inseparable from close contact with a large body of uncleanly 
citizens, with whom syphilis and leprosy are common diseases, and hideous 
immorality a matter of course. 
25. And yet Dr. Veale, in the certificate attached hereto, gives 
it as his deliberate opinion that "the lowest class Indian lives better 
and in better habitation, and with more regard to sanitary mea-
sures, than the lowest class White" (App. A). 
26. Furthermore, the doctor puts on record that while "every 
nationality had one or more of its members at some time in the 
lazaretto, there was not a single Indian attacked". Added to this is 
the testimony of the two doctors from Johannesburg to the effect 
that "the Indians are in no way inferior to the Europeans of the 
same standing" (App. B and C). 
27. In further proof of your Petitioners' contention, your 
Petitioners would take the liberty to quote from a leading article 
from The Cape Times of 13th April, 1889, which states the case for 
the Indians as fairly as could be wished: 
The outcry which was raised in the Capital of the Transvaal against 
the "Coolie trader" some little time ago is brought to the mind by 
occasional paragraphs in the morning papers, regarding the doings 
of the Indian and the Arab traders. 
After quoting a flattering description of the Indian enterprise 
from another newspaper, the article goes on to say: 
In face of such reminders as these, one may reasonably expect to be 
pardoned for referring, for a few moments, to a body of respectable, 
hard-working men whose position is so misunderstood that their very 
nationality is overlooked and a name labelled to them, which tends to 
place them in an exceedingly low level in the estimation of their fellow-
creatures. 
In the face, too, of financial operations, the success of which 
many of their detractors would envy, one fails to understand the agitation 
which would place the operators in the same category as the half-heathen 
Native and confine him to Locations, and subject him to the harsher laws 
by which the Transvaal Kaffir is governed. The impression, which is but too 
prevalent both in the Transvaal and in this Colony, that the quiet and 
inoffensive Arab shopkeeper, and the equally harmless Indian, who carries 
his pack of dainty wares from house to house, is a Coolie, is due largely 
to an insolent ignorance as to the race whence they spring. 
When one 
reflects that the conception of Brahminism, with its poetic and mysterious 
mythology, took its rise in the land of the "Coolie trader", that in that 
land 24 centuries ago, the almost divine Buddha taught and practised the 
glorious doctrine of self-sacrifice, and that it was from the plains and 
PETITION TO LORD RIPON 
209 
mountains of that weird old country that we have derived the funda-
mental truths of the very language we speak, one cannot but help regret-
ting that the children of such a race should be treated as equals of the 
children of black heathendom and outer darkness. Those who, for a few 
moments, have stayed to converse with the Indian trader have been, 
perhaps, surprised to find they are speaking to a scholar and a gentleman. 
. . . And it is the sons of this land of light who are despised as Coolies, 
and treated as Kaffirs. 
It is about time that those who cry out against the Indian merchant 
should have pointed out to them, who and what he is. Many of his worst 
detractors are British subjects enjoying all the privileges and rights of 
membership in a glorious community. 
To them the hatred of injustice, 
and the love of fair play is inherent, and when it affects themselves, they 
have a method of insisting upon their rights and liberties, whether under 
a foreign government or under their own. 
Possibly, it has never struck 
them that the Indian merchant is also a British subject, and claims the 
same liberties and rights with equal justice. 
To say the very least of it, 
if we may be permitted to employ a phrase of Palmerston's days, it is very 
un-English to claim rights one would not allow to others. 
The right of 
trade as an equal privilege has, since the abolition of the Elizabethan 
monopolies, become almost a part of the English Constitution, and were 
anyone to interfere with that right, the privilege of British citizenship 
would suddenly come to the front. 
That the Indian is more successful 
in competition and lives on less than the English merchant is 
the 
unfairest and weakest of arguments. 
The very foundation of English Com-
merce lies in the fact of our being able to compete more successfully 
with other nations. 
Surely, it is protection running to madness when 
English traders wish the State to intervene to protect them against the 
more successful operations of their rivals. 
The injustice to the Indians 
is so glaring that one is almost ashamed of one's countrymen in wishing 
to have these men treated as Natives, simply because of their success in 
trade. 
The very reason that they have been so successful against the do-
minant race is sufficient to raise them above that degrading level. ... 
Enough has been said to show that the Indian merchant is something 
more than the 'Coolie' of the newspaper, the Dutchman and the disappoint-
ed shopkeeper. 
28. It will also be seen from the above quotation that the 
European feeling, when not blinded by selfishness, is not against 
the Indians. But since it has been insisted throughout the Green 
books, before alluded to, that both the Burghers of the State and 
the European residents objected to the Indians, your Petitioners 
are sending two petitions to His Honour the State President of the 
S.A. Republic, one showing that a very large number of the Bur-
I-14
210 
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI 
ghers are not only not against the Indians freely residing and trad-
ing in the Transvaal, but they would also deem it a hardship, 
should the harassing measures ultimately result in their withdrawal 
(App. E); and the other signed by the European residents, showing 
that, in the opinion of the signatories, their sanitary habits are in 
no way inferior to those of the Europeans, and that the agitation 
against the Indians is due to the trade jealousy (App. F). But were 
it otherwise—were every European and every Burgher of the State 
dead against the Indian—even that, your Petitioners submit, can-
not affect the main issue, unless the causes which render such a 
state of things possible were such as would discredit a community 
against whom such a feeling exists. At the time of going to press 
(14-5-95), the Dutch petition was already signed by 484 Burghers 
and the European by 1340 Europeans. 
29. That the Award of the Chief Justice of the O. F. S.1 does 
not at all simplify the question and bring its solution 
a 
step 
nearer will appear from the following: 
The active exercise of Her Majesty's Government protection 
will be just as necessary as if the Award had never been given. For, 
assuming, for argument's sake and that only, that the Award is 
proper and final, and that the Chief Justice of the Transvaal has 
decided that the Indians must trade and reside in the places fixed 
by the Government, the question at once arises: where will they 
be put? May they be put in gullies—in places where sanitation 
is impossible, and which are so far away from towns as to render 
it absolutely impossible for the Indians to trade or live decently? 
That this is quite likely would appear from the following strong 
protest addressed by His Honour the British Agent against the 
Transvaal Government assigning an uninhabitable place to the 
Malays in 1893, at p. 72, Green book No. 2: 
To be forced into a small Location on a spot used as a place to 
deposit the refuse of the town, without any water except the polluted 
soakage in the gully between the Location and the town, must inevitably 
result in malignant fevers and other diseases breaking out amongst them, 
whereby their lives and the health of the community in town will be 
endangered. 
But, apart from these serious objections, some of these 
people have not the means of erecting dwellings for themselves on the 
land pointed out (or anywhere else) such as they have been accustomed 
to live in. 
The consequence of forcing them out of their present habi-
tations will, therefore, result in all of them leaving Pretoria to the great 
1 Orange Free State 
PETITION TO LORD RIPON 
211 
inconvenience 
and 
loss of the white people who employ their labour, 
not even to speak of the hardship to themselves. . . . 
30. At the last page of the same book, in his Despatch dated 
the 21st March, 1894, the High Commissioner says as follows: 
... Her 
Majesty's 
Government assume 
that 
the Arbitration will 
apply 
to 
any Aboriginal of Asia who may be a British subject. 
31. If, in terms of that Despatch, the Arbitration is to apply 
to the Aboriginals of Asia, the question is, are there any Asiatic 
Aboriginals at all in the Transvaal, unless all the Asiatics are 
to be treated as such ipso facto—a contention, your Petitioners 
are confident, will not be held out for one moment. Your Peti-
tioners, therefore, will not certainly rank as Aboriginals. 
32. If the whole objection to the Indian proceeds from sanitary 
grounds, the following restrictions are entirely unintelligible: 
1. The Indians, like the Kaffirs, cannot become owners of 
fixed property. 
2. The Indians must be registered, the fee being £3 10s. 
3. In passing through the Republic, like the Natives, they 
must be able to produce passes unless they have the regis-
tration ticket. 
4. They cannot travel first or second class on the railways. 
They are huddled together in the same compartment with 
the Natives. 
33. The sting of all these insults and indignities becomes more 
galling when it is borne in mind that many of your Petitioners 
are large holders of property in Delagoa Bay. 
There they are 
so much respected that they cannot take out a third-class railway 
ticket. They are gladly received by the Europeans there. They 
are not required to have passes. Why, your Petitioners humbly 
ask, should they be differently treated in the Transvaal? Do their 
sanitary habits become filthy as soon as they enter the Transvaal 
territory? It often happens that the same Indian is differently 
treated by the same European in Delagoa Bay and the Transvaal. 
34. To show how harassing the pass law is your Petitioners 
have appended hereto an affidavit from Mr. Haji Mahomed Haji 
Dada, which will speak for itself (App. G). Who Mr. Haji Maho-
med is will be gathered from the copy of a letter attached to the 
affidavit (App. H). He is one of the foremost Indians in South 
Africa. Your Petitioners have attached the affidavit by way of illus-
tration only, and to show how hard must be the lot of the other 
Indians, when a foremost Indian cannot travel without suffering 
212 
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI 
indignity and actual hardships. If it were necessary, hundreds of 
such cases of ill-treatment could be proved to the hilt. 
35. It has been also mentioned that the Indians live as para-
sites, and spend nothing. So far as the Indian labourers and their 
children are concerned, the objection will not hold water at all, 
and they are not supposed to be parasites, even by the most preju-
diced Europeans. Your Petitioners may be allowed to mention 
from personal experience that, so far as a majority of the labourers 
are concerned, they live above their means and have settled with 
their families. As to the trading Indians, who are the butt of all 
the prejudice, a little explanation may be necessary. Your Peti-
tioners, who are traders, do not deny, they take pride in acknow-
ledging, that they send remittances to India for those who are 
dependent upon them, but the remittances are entirely out of pro-
portion to their expenditure. The only reason why they are success-
ful competitors is because they spend less on luxuries than the 
European traders. But, all the same, they have to pay rents to 
the European landlords, wages to the Native servants, and to pay 
Dutch farmers for the animals for meat. The other provisions, 
such as tea, coffee, etc., are bought in the country. 
36. The question, then, really is not whether the Indian is 
to live in this street or that, but what status he is to occupy 
throughout South Africa. For, what is done in the Transvaal will 
also affect the action of the two Colonies. There seems to be a 
general consensus of opinion that the question will have to be settled 
on a common basis, modified by local conditions. 
37. So far as the feeling has been expressed, it is to degrade 
the Indian to the position of the Kaffir. But the general feeling, 
not so strongly expressed but here and there voiced in the news-
papers, of the respectable portion of the European community 
is quite the reverse. 
38. The Colony of Natal has been inviting the other South 
African States to a 'Coolie' Conference. 
The word 'Coolie' has 
been used officially and it shows how high the expressed feeling 
runs against the Indians and what the Conference would do, if it 
could, with regard to the question. 
In the case put by the 
Transvaal Government before the Arbitrator, it is stated that the 
word 'Coolie' applies to any person coming from Asia. 
39. When the feeling runs so high in South Africa against the 
Indian, when such a feeling owes its origin to interested agitation (as 
it is hoped, has been sufficiently shown above), when it is known 
that that feeling is by no means shared by all the Europeans, when 
there is a general scramble for wealth in South Africa, when the 
PETITION TO LORD RIPON 
213 
state of morality of the people is not particularly high, when there 
are gross misrepresentations about the habits of the 
Indians 
which have given rise to special legislation, it is not too much, your 
Petitioners submit, to request Your Excellency to 
receive with 
the utmost caution the statements received against your Petitioners, 
and the proffered solutions of the Indian question. 
40. Your Petitioners would also urge upon Your Excellency's 
consideration that not only does the Proclamation of 1858 entitle 
your Petitioners to the same privileges and rights as enjoyed by 
Her Majesty's other subjects, but your Petitioners have been spe-
cially assured of such a treatment by Your Excellency's Despatch, 
which says: 
It is the desire of Her Majesty's Government that the Queen's 
Indian subjects should be treated upon a footing of equality with all 
Her Majesty's other subjects. 
41. Nor is this a local question; but, your Petitioners submit, 
it is pre-eminently an Imperial question. The decision of the ques-
tion cannot but affect and guide the policy of the other Colo-
nies and countries, where by treaty Her Majesty's subjects enjoy 
freedom of commerce, etc., and where Her Majesty's 
Indian 
subjects also may emigrate. 
Again, the question affects a very 
large Indian population in South Africa. With those who have 
settled in South Africa, it is almost a question of life and death. 
By persistent ill-treatment they cannot but degenerate, so much so 
that from their civilized habits they would be degraded to the 
habits of the aboriginal Natives, and a generation hence, bet-
ween the progeny of the Indians thus in course of degeneration 
and the Natives, there will be very little difference in habits, and 
customs, and thought. The very object of immigration will be 
frustrated, and a large portion of Her Majesty's subjects, instead 
of being raised in the scale of civilization, will be actually lower-
ed. The results of such a state of things cannot but be disas-
trous. No self-respecting Indian can dare even visit South Africa. 
All Indian enterprise will be stifled. Your Petitioners have no 
doubt that Your Excellency will never allow such a sad event 
to happen in a place where Her Majesty enjoys suzerain power, or 
where the Union Jack flies. 
42. Your Petitioners beg respectfully to point out that, under 
the present state of feeling against the Indians in South Africa, 
for Her Majesty's Government to yield to the interested clamour 
against your Petitioners would be an act of grave injustice to your 
Petitioners. 
214 
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI 
43. If it is true that your Petitioners' sanitary habits are not 
such as to endanger the health of the European community, and 
if it be true also that the agitation against them is due to trade 
jealousy, your Petitioners submit that the Award of the Chief 
Justice of the Orange Free State cannot be binding, even though 
it be in strict accordance with the terms of the reference. For, the 
very reason which induced Her Majesty's Government to assent 
to a departure from the Convention does not then exist. 
44. If, however, Your Excellency is disposed to doubt the 
statements made herein, as regards your Petitioners' 
sanitary 
habits, your Petitioners humbly urge that, in view of the fact that 
very large interests are at stake, and that there are conflicting 
statements with regard to your Petitioners' sanitary habits, and 
that the feeling is very high against the Indians in South Africa, 
before any departure from the Convention is finally assented to, 
some impartial inquiry should be made as to the truth of the con-
flicting statements, and that the whole question of the status of 
the Indian in South Africa should be sifted. 
In conclusion, your Petitioners leave their case in Your Excel-
lency's hands, earnestly praying and fully hoping that your Peti-
tioners will not be allowed to become a prey to the colour preju-
dice, and that Her Majesty's Government will not consent to a 
treatment of the Indians in the South African Republic which 
would place them in a degraded and unnatural position and deprive 
them of the means of earning an honest livelihood. 
And for this act of justice and mercy, your Petitioners, as in 
duty bound, shall for ever pray, etc.1 
APPENDIX A 
PRETORIA, Z.A.R.2 
April 27, 1895 
I hereby certify that I have practised as a general medical practitioner 
in the town of Pretoria for the last five years. 
1 The original printed copy of the Petition does not bear signatures. 
As 
to the reactions in the Press to this petition, vide The Early Phase, pp. 534-6. 
The Award, however, was accepted by Her Majesty's Government in June 1895, 
subject to the proviso that "the Volksraad should repeal the resolutions of 
September 8, 1893, and the Government of the South African Republic should 
withdraw the circular of December 1893, so as to allow the Courts of Justice 
to give an unfettered interpretation of the Law 3 of 1885 as amended". 
For 
further developments, vide The Early Phase, pp. 537-9. 
2 This is Zuid-Afrikaansche Republick, Dutch for South African Republic. 
PETITION TO LORD RIPON 
215 
During that period I have had a considerable practice amongst the Indians, 
especially about three years ago, when they were more numerous than at 
present. 
I have generally found them cleanly in their person, and free from the 
personal diseases due to dirt or careless habits. 
Their dwellings are generally 
clean and sanitation is willingly attended to by them. 
Class considered, I 
should be of opinion that the lowest class Indian compares most favourably with 
the lowest class white, i.e., the lowest class Indian lives better and in better 
habitation, and with more regard to sanitary measures, than the lowest class 
white. 
I have, further, found that, during the period that smallpox was epidemic 
in the town and district, and is still epidemic in the district, that although 
every nation nearly had one or more of its members at some time in the 
lazaretto, there was not a single Indian attacked. 
Generally, in my opinion, it is impossible to object to the Indians on 
sanitary grounds, provided always 
the inspection of the sanitary authorities 
is made as strictly and regularly for the Indian as for the white. 
H. PRIOR VEALE, 
B.A., M.B.,B.S. (CANTAB) 
APPENDIX B 
JOHANNESBURG, 
1895 
This is to certify that I have examined the residences of the bearers of this 
note, and that they are in a sanitary and hygienic condition, and in fact such 
as any European might inhabit. 
I have resided in India. 
I can certify that 
their habitations here in the Z.A.R. are far superior to those of their native 
country. 
C. P: SPINK, M.R.C.P. & L.R.C.S. 
(LONDON) 
APPENDIX 
C 
JOHANNESBURG, 
14th March, 1895 
Having frequently occasion to visit the better class of the Indian popula-
tion of Johannesburg (merchants, etc., coming from Bombay) in my profes-
sional capacity, I give as my opinion that they are as clean in their habits 
and domestic life as white people of the same standing. 
DR. NAHMMACHER, M.D., ETC. 
216 
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI 
APPENDIX D 
JOHANNESBURG, 
14th March, 1895 
The undersigned, having been informed that the Arbitration Commis-
sion in connection with the question regarding the Indian merchants in the 
South African Republic is now holding its meeting at Bloemfontein, and, also, 
having been made aware of the accusations against the said Indian mer-
chants, to the effect that on account of their dirty habits they are a danger 
to reside amongst the European population, hereby wish to distinctly declare: 
1st. 
That the aforementioned Indian merchants, the majority of whom 
come from Bombay, keep their business places, as well as their resi-
dences, in a clean and proper sanitary state—in fact, just as good 
as the Europeans. 
2nd. That it is a distinct error in calling them "Coolies" or inhabitants of 
British India of a "lower caste", as they decidedly belong to the 
better and higher castes of India. 
HEYMANN GORDON & CO. 
BRANDE & MEIRKS 
LINDSAY & INNES 
GUSTAV SCHNEIDER 
C. LIEBE 
CHRISTOPHER P. SPINK 
A. WENTWORTH BALL 
p.p., J. GARLICK 
H. WOODCROFT 
p.p., GORDON MITCHELL & CO. 
JOHANNESBURG, Z.A.R. 
R. COURTER 
P. BARNETT & CO. 
p.p., ISRAEL BROS. 
H. CLAPHAM 
p.p., PAYNE BROS. 
H. F. BEART 
JOSEPH LAZARUS & CO. 
GEO. JAS KETTLE & CO. 
BORTON'S BROS. 
p.p., J. W. JAGGER & CO. 
T. CHARLE 
R. G. KRAMER & CO. 
p.p., HOLT & HOLT 
B. EMANUEL 
ADAM ALEXANDER 
B. ALEXANDER 
A. BEHRENS 
S. COLEMAN 
ALEXANDER P. KAY 
p.p., G. KOENIGSBERG 
J. H. HOPKINS 
p.p., LIEBERMANN, 
BELLISTEDT & CO., 
J. H. HOPKINS 
J. H. HOPKINS 
SHLOM & ARMSBERG 
p.p., HUGO BINGEN 
JAS. W. C. 
p.p., H. BERNEBERG & CO. 
GENERAL MERCHANTS AND 
IMPORTERS, JOHANNESBERG 
E. NEELL 
J. KUSTING 
N. W. LEWIS 
SPENCE & HURRY 
FREISMAN & SHAPISO 
J. FOGELMAN 
T. RATES & CO.  
p.p., B. GUNDELFINGER 
J. GUNDELFINGER 
PETITION TO LORD RIPON 
217 
APPENDIX E 
(True Translation) 
TO 
HIS HONOUR THE STATE PRESIDENT OF 
THE SOUTH AFRICAN REPUBLIC, PRETORIA 
MAY IT PLEASE YOUR HONOUR: 
In view of the gross misrepresentation by certain interested Europeans 
residing in the Republic, to the effect that the burghers of this State are op-
posed to the Indians residing or trading in the State, and their agitation against 
these people, we, the undersigned burghers, beg respectfully to state that so 
far from the burghers being opposed to these people fully stopping and trading 
in the State, they recognize in them a peaceful and law-abiding, and therefore 
desirable, class of people. 
To the poor they are a veritable blessing inas-
much as by their keen competition they keep down the prices of necessaries of 
life which they can do owing to their thrifty and temperate habits. 
We venture to submit that their withdrawal from the State will be a 
dire calamity to us, especially those of us who, living far away from centres 
of business, depend upon the Indians for the supply of our daily wants, and 
that therefore any measures restrictive of their freedom, and having for their 
object their ultimate removal, and especially that of those Indians who are 
traders and 
hawkers, 
will necessarily 
interfere with our enjoyment and 
comforts. 
We, therefore, humbly pray that the Government will not take any 
steps that may scare away the Indians from the Transvaal.1 
APPENDIX F 
TO 
HIS HONOUR THE STATE PRESIDENT OF 
THE SOUTH AFRICAN REPUBLIC, PRETORIA 
We, the undersigned Europeans residing in this Republic, beg to protest 
against the agitation set up against the Indians, residing or trading freely 
in the country, by certain interested persons. 
So far as our experience is concerned, we believe their sanitary habits 
to be in no way inferior to those of the Europeans, and the statements about 
prevalence of infectious diseases among them are certainly without ground, 
especially as regards the Indian traders. 
We firmly believe that the agitation owes its origin not to their habits 
as regards sanitation, but to trade jealousy, because, owing to their frugal and 
temperate habits, they have been able to keep down the prices of necessaries 
of life and have therefore been an inestimable boon to the poor classes of the 
society in the State. 
1 Signed by a number of Burghers 
218 
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI 
We do not believe any good cause exists for compelling them to reside 
or trade in separate quarters. 
We would therefore humbly request Your Honour not to adopt or coun-
tenance any measure that would tend to restrict their freedom and ultimately 
result in their withdrawal from the Republic, a result that cannot but strike 
at the very means of their livelihood and cannot, therefore, we humbly submit, 
be contemplated with complacency in a Christian country.1 
APPENDIX G 
I, Haji Mahomed Haji Dada, managing and senior partner of Haji 
Mahomed Haji Dada & Co., of Durban, Pretoria, Delagoa Bay and elsewhere, 
merchants, do make oath and say that: 
1. Some time in the year 1894, I was travelling from Johannesburg to 
Charlestown by coach. 
2. 
As I reached the Transvaal border, a European with a uniform and an-
other came up and asked me for a pass. 
I said I had no pass and was never 
before required to produce any pass. 
3. The man thereupon roughly said to me that I would have to get one. 
4. 
I asked him to get one and offered to pay. 
5. 
He then very roughly asked me to go down with him to the pass officer, 
and threatened to pull me out if I did not do so. 
6. 
In order to avoid further trouble I got down. 
I was made to walk about 
2 miles, the man riding on a horse. 
7. 
On my reaching the office I was required to take no pass but was only 
asked where I was going to. 
I was then asked to go away. 
8. The man who was on horseback, and who went with me, also left me and 
I had to walk back two miles to find the coach gone. 
9. 
I was therefore obliged, although I had paid my fare as far as Charles-
town, to walk there, a distance of over two miles. 
10. 
I know from personal knowledge that many other Indians, similarly placed, 
have undergone such troubles and indignity. 
11. About a few days ago, I had to travel to Pretoria from Delagoa Bay in 
the company of two friends. 
12. We were all required to arm ourselves with passes, just as the Natives 
of South Africa are required to do, in order to be able to travel in the 
Transvaal. 
HAJEE MAHOMED HAJEE DADA 
Sworn before me at Pretoria, this the 24th day of April, 1895. 
Envaralohery 
V. Rrasak 
1 The petition is 
printed in Afrikaans and in English. 
The original 
signatures do not appear on the filed copy. 
PETITION TO LORD ELGIN 
219 
APPENDIX H 
Tel. & Cable Address: "BOATING" 
POINT, PORT NATAL, 
March 2, 1895 
FROM 
THE AFRICA BOATING COMPANY, LTD. 
TO 
MR. HAJI MAHOMED HAJI DADA 
(MESSRS HAJI MAHOMED HAJI DADA & Co.) 
DEAR SIR, 
Seeing you are about to pay a visit to India, we take this opportunity of 
placing on record our very high appreciation of your various business qualifi-
cations which we have proved during our business relations with you for the 
last fifteen years, and it gives us very great pleasure in stating that your inte-
grity in business matters has never been questioned by any of the commercial 
community during your residence here, and we trust you will see your way to 
return to Natal, and we then hope that we shall renew our business relations 
with you once again. 
Hoping you will have a very pleasant voyage. 
We are, 
Yours faithfully, 
For the African Boating Co., 
CHARLES T. HITCHINS 
From a photostat: S.N. 417-424; also S.N. 451(3-16) 
