62. 
PETITION TO LORD ELGIN1 
[Before May 5, 1895] 
TO 
HIS EXCELLENCY THE RIGHT HONOURABLE THE EARL OF ELGIN, 
P.C., G.M.S.I., G.M.I.E., ETC., ETC. 
VICEROY AND GOVERNOR-GENERAL OF INDIA 
CALCUTTA 
THE 
PETITION 
OF 
THE 
UNDERSIGNED 
INDIANS 
RESIDING 
IN 
THE 
SOUTH 
AFRICAN 
REPUBLIC 
HUMBLY SHEWETH THAT: 
Your 
Petitioners 
representing 
the 
Indian 
community 
in the South African Republic venture hereby to approach Your 
1 This petition, along with the preceding item, was forwarded by Sir 
Jacobus de Wet on May 30, 1895, to the High Commissioner, Cape Town. 
220 
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI 
Excellency with regard to Her Majesty's Indian British subjects 
in the South African Republic. 
Your Petitioners instead of reiterating the facts and argu-
ments embodied in a similar petition1, signed by over 10,000 Bri-
tish Indians, and sent to the Right Honourable the Secretary of 
State for the Colonies, beg to append hereto a copy of the petition 
with its annexures, and commend it to Your Excellency's perusal. 
Your Petitioners after mature deliberation have come to the 
conclusion that unless they sought the direct protection of Your 
Excellency as Her Majesty's representative and virtual Ruler of 
all India, and unless that protection was graciously accorded, 
the position of the Indians in the South African Republic, and 
indeed throughout the whole of South Africa, would be utterly 
helpless and the enterprising Indians in South Africa would be 
forcibly degraded to the position of the Natives of South Africa, 
and this through no fault of their own. 
If an intelligent stranger were to visit the South African Re-
public, and were told that there was a class of people in South 
Africa who could not hold fixed property, who could not move 
about the State without passes, who alone had to pay a special 
registration fee of £3 10s as soon as they entered the country for 
purposes of trade, who could not get licences to trade, and who 
would shortly be ordered to remove to places far away from towns, 
where only they could reside and trade, and who could not stir 
out of their houses after 9 o'clock, and that stranger were asked 
to guess the reasons for such special disabilities, would he not 
conclude that these people must be veritable ruffians, anarchists, 
a political danger to the State and society? 
And yet your Peti-
tioners beg to assure Your Excellency that the Indians who are 
labouring under all the above disabilities are neither ruffians nor 
anarchists, but one of the most peaceful and law-abiding commu-
nities in South Africa, and especially in the South African Republic. 
For in Johannesburg, while there are people belonging to 
European nationalities who are a source of real danger to the 
State, and who have necessitated only lately an increase of the 
police force, and have thrown too much work on the detective 
department, the Indian community have not given the State 
any cause for anxiety on that score. 
In support of the above, your Petitioners respectfully refer 
Your Excellency to the newspapers throughout South Africa. 
1 Vide the preceding item. 
PETITION TO LORD ELGIN 
221 
Even the active agitation, that has brought about the present 
state of things with regard to the Indian community, has not de-
sired to bring any such charges against the Indians. 
The only charge brought forward is that the Indians do not 
observe proper sanitation. Your Petitioners trust that the charge 
has been conclusively shown to be groundless in the representation 
to His Excellency the Right Honourable the Marquis of Ripon. 
But assuming that the charge has some ground, it is clear that 
that could not be a reason for preventing the Indians from holding 
fixed property, or moving about the country freely and without 
restraint on their liberty. That could not be a reason for making 
the Indians liable for a special payment of £3 10s. 
It might be said that the Government of the South African 
Republic has already passed certain laws, and that the 
Chief 
Justice of the Orange Free State has already given his Award which 
is binding on Her Majesty's Government. 
These objections, your Petitioners humbly believe, have been 
answered in the accompanying petition. 
The London Convention 
specially protects the rights of all Her Majesty's British subjects. 
This is a recognized fact. Her Majesty's Government assented to a 
departure from the Convention and also to arbitration on sani-
tary grounds. And such assent to a departure from the Convention, 
your Petitioners are informed, was given without consulting Your 
Excellency's predecessor in office. Thus, so far as the Indian Gov-
ernment is concerned, your Petitioners venture to urge that the 
assent is not binding. That the Indian Government should have 
been consulted is self-evident. And even if Your Excellency were 
ill-disposed to intervene on your Petitioners' behalf at this stage 
and on this ground alone, the fact that the reasons which induced 
the above assent did not and do not exist, that in fact Her Majes-
ty's Government has been misled by misrepresentations is, your 
Petitioners submit, sufficient to justify them in praying for Your 
Excellency's intervention, and Your Excellency in granting the 
prayer. 
And the issues involved are so tremendously important and 
Imperial, that in view of your Petitioners' emphatic but respectful 
protest against the allegation about sanitation, your Petitioners 
humbly urge that the question cannot be settled without a tho-
rough inquiry, without injustice being done to Her Majesty's 
Indian British subjects in the South African Republic. 
Without further encroaching upon Your Excellency's valuable 
time, your Petitioners would again request Your Excellency's un-
divided attention to the annexure and, in conclusion, earnestly 
222 
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI 
hope that Your Excellency's protection will be liberally granted 
to the Indian British subjects residing in South Africa. 
And for this act of justice and mercy, your Petitioners shall for 
ever pray, etc.1 
From a photostat of a printed copy: S.N. 451 
