64. A BAND OF VEGETARIAN MISSIONARIES 
It was in England that I read in Mrs. Anna Kingsford's Per-
fect Way in Diet that there was a colony of Trappists3 in South 
Africa who were vegetarians. 
Ever since that I had wished to 
see these vegetarians. The wish has at last been realized. 
At the outset, I may remark that South Africa, and particular-
ly Natal, is especially adapted for vegetarians. The Indians have 
made Natal the Garden Colony of South Africa. One can grow 
1 This petition, too, was ineffective. Dadabhai Naoroji led a deputation 
to Chamberlain at the Colonial Office on August 29. It presented the case 
of the Indians in the four States of South Africa. 
2 On May 8, Camroodeen wrote back (S.N. 
39) reporting 
that he 
had not been able to collect a single signature to the petition to be presented 
to Lord Ripon. 
3 Monks of the Cistercian order founded in 1140 A.D. at Soligny-la-Trappe 
and noted for silence and other austerities 
A BAND OF VEGETARIAN MISSIONARIES 
223 
almost anything on the South African soil, and that in abundance. 
The supply of bananas, pineapples and oranges is almost inexhaus-
tible, and far greater than the demand. 
There is no wonder that 
the vegetarians can thrive very well in Natal. The only wonder is, 
that in spite of such facilities and the warm climate, there should 
be so few vegetarians. The result is that large tracts of land still 
remain neglected and uncultivated. The staple articles of food are 
imported when it is perfectly possible to grow all of them in South 
Africa; and in a vast territory like Natal, there is much distress 
among a small population of 40,000 whites. All this, because they 
will not take to agricultural pursuits. 
Another curious but painful result of the unnatural mode of 
living is that there is a very strong prejudice against the Indian 
population who also number 40,000. 
The Indians, being vege-
tarians, take to agriculture without any difficulty whatsoever. 
Naturally, therefore, all over the Colony, the small farms are own-
ed by Indians, whose keen competition gives offence to the white 
population. 
They are following a dog-in-the-manger and suicidal 
policy in so behaving. They would rather leave the vast agricultural 
resources in the country undeveloped, than have the Indians to 
develop them. 
Owing to such stolidity and shortsightedness, a 
Colony that can easily support double, or even treble, the number 
of European and Indian inhabitants, with difficulty supports 
80,000 Europeans and Indians. The Transvaal Government have 
gone so far in their prejudice, that the whole of the Republic, al-
though the soil is very fruitful, remains a desert of dust. And if 
the gold mines could not be worked from any cause, thousands 
of men would be thrown out of employment and literally starved 
to death. Is there not here a great lesson to be learnt? 
The flesh-
eating habits have really tended to retard the progress of the com-
munity, and, indirectly, to create division among the two great 
communities which ought to be united and work hand in hand. 
There is also this striking fact to be noticed that the Indians en-
joy as good a health as the Europeans in the Colony, and I know 
that many doctors would be simply starving if there were no Euro-
peans, or their flesh-pots, and that by their thrifty and temperate 
habits, both attributable to vegetarianism, Indians can successfully 
compete with Europeans. Of course, it should be understood that 
the Indians in the Colony are not pure vegetarians. 
They are 
practically so. 
We shall see presently how the Trappists of Mariann Hill, 
near Pinetown, are a standing testimony to the truth of the above 
remarks. 
224 
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI 
Pinetown is a little village, situated at a distance of 16 miles 
by rail from Durban. It is about 1,100 feet above the sea level, 
and enjoys a beautiful climate. 
The Trappist monastery is about three miles distant from 
Pinetown. My companion and I walked to Mariann Hill, as the 
hill, or rather the cluster of hills, on which the Abbey is situated, 
is called. It is a very pleasant walk through the little hills all cover-
ed with green grass. 
On our reaching the settlement, we saw a gentleman with a 
pipe in his mouth, and we at once knew that he was not one of the 
brotherhood. He, however, took us to the visitors' room, where 
a visitors' book was kept. It appeared from the book that it com-
menced from 1894, and there were hardly twenty pages filled up. 
Indeed, the mission is not at all known as it ought to be. 
One of the brotherhood came up and bowed very low. 
We 
were offered tamarind water and pineapples. After having re-
freshed ourselves, we accompanied the guide to the various pla-
ces he took us to. The various buildings one 
saw were all 
substantial red-brick buildings. All was quiet; the silence was 
broken only by the noise of the instruments in the workshops or 
the native children. 
The settlement is a quiet little model village, owned on the 
truest republican principles. 
The principle of liberty, equality 
and fraternity is carried out in its entirety. Every man is a brother, 
every woman a sister. 
The monks number about 120 on the 
settlement, and the nuns, or the sisters as they are called, number 
about 60. The sisters' cloister is about half a mile from the bro-
thers'. Both the brothers and the sisters observe a strict vow of 
silence and of chastity. No brother or sister may speak except those 
who are allowed to by the Abbot, who is the head of the Trap-
pists in Natal. And those are only allowed to speak who have 
to go to town to make purchases or to look after visitors. 
The brothers are dressed in long robes with a black piece of 
cloth in front and on the back. The sisters wear red clothing of 
the simplest style. None seemed to wear socks. 
A candidate for the brotherhood has to make a vow for two 
years and, till then, is called a novice. After two years, he may 
either leave the cloister or make a vow for life. A model Trappist 
gets up at 2 a.m. and devotes four hours to prayer and contem-
plation. At six, he has his breakfast, which consists of bread and 
coffee, or some such simple foods. He dines at twelve, and makes a 
meal of bread and soup, and fruits. He sups at six in the evening 
and goes to bed at 7 or 8 p.m. The brothers eat no fish, flesh or fowl. 
A BAND OF VEGETARIAN MISSIONARIES 
225 
They discard even eggs. They take milk, but in Natal we were 
told they could not get it cheap. The sisters are allowed meat 
four days in the week. Asked why they put up with such an ano-
maly, the obliging guide said: "Because the sisters are more deli-
cate than the brothers." Neither my companion, who is almost a 
vegetarian, nor I could see the force or logic of the reasoning. 
Certainly, both of us were very much grieved to hear the news 
which was a surprise to us, for we expected both the brothers and 
the sisters to be vegetarians. 
They take no intoxicating liquors except under medical ad-
vice. None may keep money for private use. All are equally rich 
or poor. 
We saw no wardrobes, chests of drawers, or portmanteaus, 
although we were allowed to see every inch of the place. They may 
not leave the limits of the settlement, except those who are per-
mitted to do so on business. They may not read newspapers and 
books that are not religious. They may not read any religious 
books but only those that are allowed. It is this hard austere 
life that caused our friend with the pipe in his mouth, whom we 
first met, to remark in reply to a question whether he was a 
Trappist—"No fear, I am anything but a Trappist." And yet 
the good brothers and sisters did not seem to consider their lives to 
have fallen on hard places. 
A Protestant clergyman said to his audience that the Roman 
Catholics are weakly, sickly and sad. Well, if the Trappists are 
any criterion of what a Catholic is, they are, on the contrary, 
healthy and cheerful. Wherever we went, a beaming smile and a 
lowly bow greeted us, whether we saw a brother or a sister. Even 
while the guide was descanting on the system he prized so much, 
he did not at all seem to consider the self-chosen discipline a hard 
yoke to bear. A better instance of undying faith and perfect, im-
plicit obedience could not well be found anywhere else. 
If their repast is the simplest possible, their dining tables and 
bedrooms are no less so. 
The former are made on the settlement, of wood, without 
any varnish. They use no tablecloths. The knives and spoons are 
the cheapest to be had in Durban. Instead of glass-ware they use 
enamelled things. 
For bedrooms they have a large hall (but none too large for 
the inmates) which contains about 80 beds. Every available space 
is utilized for the beds. 
In the Native quarters they seem to have overdone it in point 
of beds. As soon as we entered the sleeping hall for Natives, we 
I-15 
226 
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI 
noticed the closeness and the stuffy air. The beds are all joined to-
gether, separated by only single boards. There was hardly space 
enough to walk. 
They believe in no colour distinctions. These Natives are ac-
corded the same treatment as the whites. They are mostly children. 
They get the same food as the brothers, and are dressed as well 
as they themselves are. While it is generally said, not without some 
truth, that the Christian Kaffir is a failure, everyone, even the 
wildest sceptic, admits that the mission of the Trappists has proved 
the most successful in point of turning out really good, Christian 
Natives. While the mission schools of other denominations very 
often enable the Natives to contract all the terrible vices of the 
Western civilization, and very rarely produce any moral effect on 
them, the Natives of the Trappist mission are patterns of simplicity, 
virtue and gentleness. It was a treat to see them saluting passers-by 
in a humble yet dignified manner. 
There are about 1,200 Natives on the mission, 
including 
children and adults. They have all exchanged a life of sloth, in-
dolence and superstition, for one of industry, usefulness and devo-
tion to one Supreme God. 
On the settlement there 
are 
various 
workshops—black-
smiths', tinsmiths', carpenters', shoemakers', tanners', etc., where 
the Natives are taught all these useful industries, in addition to 
the English and the Zulu languages. Here it may be remarked 
that it speaks volumes for the highmindedness of the noble settlers 
that, although almost all of them are Germans, they never at-
tempt to teach the Natives German; all these Natives work side by 
side with the whites. 
At the sisters' cloisters, they have the ironing, sewing, straw-
hat manufacturing and knitting departments, where one can see 
the Native girls, dressed in clean costumes, working assiduously. 
About two miles from the Abbey is situated the printing de-
partment, and the flour mill worked by a waterfall. 
It is a huge 
pile of building. There is also an oil machine, which is worked 
for pressing the oil from monkey nuts. 
It is needless to mention 
that the above-mentioned workshops supply the settlers with most 
of their requirements. 
They grow many kinds of tropical fruits on the farm and the 
settlement is almost self-supporting. 
They love and respect, and are in turn loved and respected 
by, the Natives living in their neighbourhood who, as a rule, supply 
them with the converts. 
A BAND OF VEGETARIAN MISSIONARIES 
227 
The most prominent feature of the settlement is that you see 
religion everywhere. Every room has a Cross and, on the entrance, 
a small receptacle for holy water which every inmate reverently 
applies to his eyelids, the forehead and the chest. 
Even the quick 
walk to the flour mill is not without some reminder of the Cross. 
It is a lovely footpath. 
On one side, you have a magnificent 
valley through which runs a small rivulet which murmurs the 
sweetest music, and on the other, little rocks whereon are carved 
the various inscriptions reminding you of the scenes of the Cal-
vary. The valley is wholly covered with a green carpet of vege-
tation, studded with beautiful trees here and there. 
A lovelier 
walk, or a lovelier scenery, could not be well imagined. The ins-
criptions carved in such a place cannot fail to produce a grand 
effect upon the mind. They are carved at such regular intervals that 
no sooner has one completed one's thoughts on one inscription 
than another meets one's gaze. 
The walk thus forms a continuous exercise for calm contem-
plation, unmarred by any other thoughts, or outside noise and 
bustle. Some of the inscriptions are: "Jesus falls a first time"; 
"Jesus falls a second time"; "Simon carries the Cross"; "Jesus is 
nailed to the Cross"; "Jesus is laid in his mother's lap", etc., etc. 
Of course, the Natives, too, are chiefly vegetarians. Although 
they are not prohibited from taking flesh or meat, they are not 
supplied with any on the settlement. 
There are about twelve such settlements in South Africa, most 
of which are in Natal. 
There are in all about 300 monks and 
about 120 nuns. 
Such are our vegetarians in Natal. Though they do not make 
of vegetarianism a creed, though they base it simply on the 
ground that a vegetarian diet helps them to crucify the flesh 
better, and though, perhaps, they are not even aware of the exis-
tence of the vegetarian societies, and would not even care to 
read any vegetarian literature, where is the vegetarian who would 
not be proud of this noble band, even a casual intercourse with 
whom fills one with a spirit of love, charity and self-sacrifice, and 
who are a living testimony to the triumph of vegetarianism from 
a spiritual point of view? I know from personal experience that 
a visit to the farm is worth a voyage from London to Natal. It 
cannot but produce a lasting holy impression on the mind. No 
matter whether one is a Protestant, a Christian or a Buddhist 
or what not, one cannot help exclaiming, after a visit to the farm: 
"If this is Roman Catholicism, everything said against it is a 
lie." It proves conclusively, to my mind, that a religion appears 
228 
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI 
divine or devilish, according as its professors choose to make it 
appear. 
The Vegetarian, 18-5-1895 
