65. 
EXTRACTS FROM LETTER TO 
"THE NATAL ADVERTISER"1 
[Before May 22, 1895] 
The report states that the Indians were observed "with por-
tions of sleepers on their heads".2 The evidence was that . . .3 
seven charged had on their heads portions of sleepers together with 
. 
. .4 Although the sleepers were called for they were never pro-
duced. The report says, "On attempting to arrest them 71 of their 
number turned round with sticks, tins, pieces of iron and cook-
ing utensils and plied them freely on the police making them 
fly for safety. P. C. Madden arrived on the scene with further as-
sistance." The evidence went to show that the seven charged 
turned round with sticks, and two of them incited to oppose. 
There was only one policeman at first and that was the Native 
constable. Then P. C. Madden alone, not with any assistance, 
came on the scene. While the Native constable is alleged to have 
been resisted, P. C. Madden distinctly said he was not resisted at 
all. The report goes on: "The rest followed by a body . . . say-
ing they would not leave until their colleagues were discharged." 
The uncontradicted evidence of Mr. Mason, who knew what he 
was talking about, went to show that "the rest" were under arrest 
and were, Mr. Mason was informed by Mr. Madden, going to 
be charged by the Railway Department with desertion. 
They have 
gone now for the second time to Mr. Mason to complain that 
they were starving. The report says, "Three or four constables 
appeared in the court with their faces bruised and their clothes 
torn." The facts are that there was only the Native constable who 
said he was beaten with sticks. When asked if he could show 
1 Referring to a report in The Natal Advertiser, 20-5-1895, Gandhiji wrote 
"a long letter", pointing out its inaccuracies. The original not being avai-
lable, the extracts as published in the Advertiser, 22-5-1895, are reproduced 
here. 
2 According to the report a large number of Indians, leaving the rail-
way yard, were noticed in possession of portions of sleepers. Earlier the railway 
authorities had ordered that coal instead of firewood be supplied to them 
which they resented. 
3 & 4 Some words here are undecipherable. 
PETITION TO NATAL LEGISLATIVE COUNCIL 
229 
any marks, he said it was "somewhere" on his head that no one 
could see. He had no bruises. His clothes were neither torn, nor 
did he complain that they were. So far as my memory can be 
trusted, I believe there was not a single word about "utensils 
and irons". And if all had bundles of sticks on their heads it 
is not easy to understand how they could carry utensils, etc. P. C. 
Madden was the only other constable who gave evidence. But 
he was not interfered with and he could give no evidence of his 
own knowledge as to the Native constable having been beaten. 
. 
. 
. 1 
This is not the first occasion on which I have found the 
facts in your reports mis-stated or exaggerated, and I am sorry 
to say whenever this has happened, they have been mis-stated 
and exaggerated much to the disadvantage of the Indian com-
munity.2 
The Natal Advertiser, 22-5-1895 
