66. 
PETITION TO NATAL LEGISLATIVE COUNCIL3 
DURBAN, 
[Before June 26, 1895] 
TO 
THE HONOURABLE THE PRESIDENT 
AND 
MEMBERS 
OF 
THE HONOURABLE THE LEGISLATIVE COUNCIL 
THE PETITION OF THE UNDERSIGNED INDIANS, 
RESIDING 
AS 
TRADERS IN THE COLONY OF NATAL 
HUMBLY SHEWETH THAT: 
Your Petitioners, 
as 
representing 
the 
Indian 
commu-
nity in the Colony, venture hereby to petition Your Honourable 
1 The report here says that "some further evidence" recapitulated by 
Gandhiji has been omitted. 
2 The report concludes: Mr. Gandhi implies that any alleged "mis-state-
ments" or 
"exaggerations" have 
been knowingly made with a view to 
prejudicing the Indian community in the eyes of our readers. Such however is 
not the case. If they have occurred it has been quite unwittingly. In re-
porting court cases the evidence has almost always to be condensed, and the 
summary may not satisfy certain of the interested parties. The reports, however, 
whether accurate or inaccurate are written without the slightest desire or in-
tention to prejudicially affect one side or the other. 
3 The Petition was published in The Natal Mercury, 26-6-1895. 
230 
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI 
Council with regard to the Indian Immigration Law Amend-
ment Bill1, so far as it affects the present term of indenture, and 
proposes a yearly licence of £3 to be taken out by every immi-
grant wishing to stop in the Colony as a free Indian, after finish-
ing his term of indenture. 
Your Petitioners respectfully submit that both the clauses 
above referred to are entirely unjust and uncalled for. 
Your Petitioners humbly draw the attention of this Honoura-
ble House to the following from the report of the delegates, 
Messrs Binns2 and Mason, who were commissioned to go to 
India in connection with this matter: 
So far no second term of indenture has been agreed to in the case 
of any country to which Coolies emigrated, although the consent of the 
Government of India had frequently been asked for; and in no instance 
had the condition of compulsory return at the end of the indentures 
been sanctioned. 
Thus the clauses in the Bill are a total departure, your Peti-
tioners submit, for the worse, from the practice prevalent through-
out the British Colonies. 
Assuming that the average age of an indentured Indian at 
the time of his entering into the contract of indenture is 25, 
under the clause which expects the Indian to work for 10 years, 
the best part of the life of the indentured Indian would be simply 
spent away in a state of bondage. 
For an Indian to return to India after continuous 10 years' 
stay in the Colony would be pure fatuity. All the old cords and 
ties will have been broken up. Such an Indian will be compa-
ratively a stranger in his motherland. 
To find work in India would 
be almost impossible. 
The market is already overcrowded, and 
he will not have amassed sufficient fortune to enable him to live 
on the interest on his capital. 
The total of the wages for 10 years would amount to £87. 
If the indentured Indian saves £50, allowing only £37 for cloth-
ing and other expenses during the whole 10 years, that capital 
will not give him interest sufficient to keep body and soul together, 
even in a poor country like India. Such an Indian, therefore, even 
if he ventured to return to India, would be compelled to return 
1 The Bill which was introduced in the Natal Council on June 25 had 
its second reading the next day and was passed. 
2 Sir Henry Binns (1837-99); Premier of Natal 1897 
PETITION TO NATAL LEGISLATIVE COUNCIL 
231 
under indenture, and thus his whole life would be spent in bond-
age. 
Moreover, during the 
10 
years 
the indentured Indian 
would be entirely neglecting his family, should he have any. And 
a family man will not be able to save even £50. Your Petitioners 
know several instances of indentured Indians with families having 
saved nothing. 
As to the 2nd Clause, about the £3 licence, your Petitioners 
submit that it is calculated to create wide discontent and oppres-
sion. Why one class of Her Majesty's subjects, and this the most 
useful to the Colony, should be singled out for such taxation, 
it is, 
in the humble opinion of your Petitioners, difficult to 
understand. 
Your Petitioners most respectfully venture to submit that it is 
not in accordance with the principles of simple justice and equity 
to make a man pay heavily for being allowed to remain free in 
the Colony after he has already lived under bondage for 
10 
years. 
The fact that the clauses will apply only to those Indians who 
would come to the Colony after the Bill has become law, and that 
they would know the terms under which they may come, does not 
free the clauses from the objections sought to be raised against 
them. For both the contracting parties, your Petitioners submit, 
will not have the same freedom of action. An Indian hard-pressed 
by pangs of poverty and finding it impossible to support his 
family can scarcely be called a free agent when he signs the con-
tract of indenture. Men have been known to consent to do far 
worse things in order to be free from immediately pressing diffi-
culties. Your Petitioners, therefore, humbly hope and pray that the 
clauses above referred to will not meet with the approval of this 
Honourable House, and for this act of justice and mercy, your 
Petitioners shall for ever pray, etc., etc. 
ABDULLA HAJI ADAM 
AND 
SEVERAL OTHER INDIANS 
From a photostat of a printed copy: S.N. 435 
