67. 
MEMORIAL TO J. CHAMBERLAIN 
[DURBAN, 
August 11, 1895] 
TO 
THE RIGHT HONOURABLE JOSEPH CHAMBERLAIN, 
HER MAJESTY'S PRINCIPAL SECRETARY OF STATE 
FOR THE COLONIES, LONDON 
THE MEMORIAL 
OF 
THE 
UNDERSIGNED 
INDIANS 
RESIDING IN THE COLONY OF NATAL 
HUMBLY SHEWETH THAT: 
Your 
Memorialists, 
representing 
the 
Indian 
community 
in the 
Colony 
of Natal, 
respectfully 
venture to 
approach 
you with respect to the Indian 
Immigration 
Law Amendment 
Bill recently passed by the Hon. Legislative Assembly, 
and the 
Hon. Legislative Council of Natal, in so far as it affects the 
existing conditions of indenture and requires a special licence, 
costing £3 every year, to be taken out by the indentured Indians 
coming under that Law and wishing to remain in the Colony as 
free Indians. 
2. Your Memorialists, with a view to have the Clauses dealing 
with the above matter left out, presented respectful memorials1 to 
both the Honourable Houses, but, your Memorialists regret to 
mention, without avail. The copies of the memorials are annexed 
hereto, and marked A and B respectively. 
3. The Clauses that deal with the matter are as follows: 
Clause 2. 
From and after the date when this Act shall take effect 
the indentures to be signed by Indian immigrants as provided by Schedules 
B and C of the Indian Immigration Law, 1891, referred to in Section 
11 of the said Law, shall contain a Covenant by the Indian immigrants, 
in words as follows: 
And we further agree that after the expiration or other determination 
we shall either return to India or remain in Natal under indentures to 
be from time to time entered into; provided that each term of new indentured 
service shall be for two years, and provided further, that the rate of 
wages for each year of indentured service after that provided by this Con-
tract shall be 16/- per month for the first year, 17/- per month for the 
1 Vide "Petition to Natal Legislative Assembly", 
before 
5-5-1895, and 
the preceding item. 
MEMORIAL TO J. CHAMBERLAIN 
233 
second year, 18/- per month for the third year, 19/- per month for the 
fourth year, and 20/- per month for the fifth and each succeeding year. 
Clause 6 runs as follows: 
Every indentured Indian who shall have entered into the Covenant 
set out in Section 2 of this Act, and who shall fail, neglect, or refuse 
to return to India, or become re-indentured in Natal, shall take out year 
by year, a pass or licence to remain in the Colony to be issued by the 
Magistrate of his district, and shall pay for such pass or licence a yearly 
sum of £3 sterling, which may be recovered by summary process by any 
Clerk of the Peace or other officer appointed to get in such licence 
money. 
The Schedule B referred to in Clause 2, quoted above, so far 
as it relates to the period of service is as follows: 
We, the undersigned, emigrants from ... to Natal, hereby engage 
to serve the employer to whom we may respectively be allotted by the 
Protector of Indian Immigrants to Natal; provided that we shall receive 
monthly in money the wages stated hereunder opposite our respective 
names, and the allowances following. 
4. From the above it will be seen, that if the Bill under dis-
cussion became law, an indentured Indian, in case he desires to 
settle in the Colony after the first five years of his indentured ser-
vice, should either have to remain under perpetual indenture, or 
pay a yearly tax of £3; your Memorialists have used the word tax 
advisedly, because that was the word used in the original Bill be-
fore it passed the Committee stage. Your Memorialists submit that 
the mere change of name from tax to licence does not make it the 
less offensive but shows the knowledge on the part of the framers 
that a special poll-tax, on a special class of people in the Colony, 
is entirely repugnant to the British notions of justice. 
5. Now, your Memorialists humbly, but emphatically, submit, 
that to raise the term of indenture from five years to a practi-
cally indefinite period is extremely unjust, especially because such 
a measure is absolutely uncalled for so far as the industries pro-
tected, or affected by, the indentured Indians are concerned. 
6. The clauses owe their origin to the Commission that was 
sent out to India in the year 1894 by the Natal Government, and 
the report made by the Delegates, Messrs Binns and Mason, who 
formed the Commission. The reasons given in that report for such 
legislation are given at pp. 20 and 21 of the Annual Report of the 
Protector of Immigrants for 1894. Your Memorialists venture to quote 
the following from the report of the Delegates: 
234 
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI 
In a country where the Native population is in number so far in 
excess of the European, the unlimited settlement of Indians is not consi-
dered desirable, and there is a general wish that when they have completed 
their last period of indenture they should return to India. There are al-
ready about 25,000 free Indians settled in the Colony, many of whom 
have allowed their right to a return passage to lapse; this is exclusive of 
a very considerable Banya trading population! 
7. Thus the reasons for the special arrangement are political 
merely. Properly speaking, there is no question of overcrowding 
at all. There can be none in a newly opened-up country where 
there are yet vast tracts of land entirely uninhabited and unculti-
vated. 
8. Again, in the same report, the Delegates state as follows: 
There is a strong feeling amongst the merchants and shopkeepers 
with regard to the Arabs, who are all traders and not workers; but as 
they are mostly British subjects and do not go to the Colony under any 
form of agreement, it is recognized that they cannot be interfered with. 
* 
* 
* 
The Coolie does not come into competition to any considerable 
extent with the European. 
Field work for Europeans is impossible on 
the coast, where all the plantations are situated, and the number of 
servants other than Coolies and Natives has always been very small. 
* 
* 
* 
Although we are decidedly of opinion that up to the present the 
working Indians who have settled down (the italics are your Memorialists') 
have been of great benefit to the Colony, we cannot avoid, having regard 
to the future, and, in the face of the great Native problem yet to be solved 
in South Africa, sharing in the concern which is now felt. If a large pro-
portion of the Coolies had taken advantage of the return passage provid-
ed for them, there would have been less cause for alarm. 
9. Your Memorialists most respectfully submit that the above 
extracts, which form part of the reasons given for measures restric-
tive of the settlement of freed Indians in the Colony, go to prove 
the exact opposite; for if the Indian traders, to which class most of 
your Memorialists belong, who "do not go to the Colony under 
any form of agreement", could not be interfered with, much less the 
indentured Indians, who are also equally British subjects and who 
are, so to speak, invited to go to the Colony, and whose settle-
ment (in the Delegates' own words) "has been of great benefit to 
MEMORIAL TO J. CHAMBERLAIN 
235 
the Colony", and who have therefore a special claim on the good-
will and attention of the Colonists. 
10. And, if the 'Coolie' "does not come into competition to 
any considerable extent with the Europeans", where is the justi-
fication, your Memorialists humbly ask, for adopting measures 
that would make it difficult for the indentured Indians to earn 
honest bread in peace and freedom? It does not certainly lie in any 
qualities special to the indentured Indians which render them 
dangerous members of society. The peace-loving disposition and 
the mildness of the Indian nation are proverbial. Their obedience 
to authorities over them is no less prominent a trait of their cha-
racter, and it would not lie in the mouth of the Delegates to say 
otherwise; for the Protector, who was one of the Delegates, in his 
report, at p. 15 of the same book, says: 
Many persons, I am aware, condemn the Indians as a race, yet 
these persons cannot fail, if they look around them, to see hundreds of 
these Indians honestly and peaceably pursuing their several useful and 
desirable occupations. 
* 
* 
* 
I am pleased to be able to state that the Indians generally resident 
in the Colony continue to form a prosperous, enterprising and law-abiding 
section of the community. 
11. The Hon. the Attorney-General, in moving the second 
reading of the Bill, is reported to have said that: 
There was no intention to interfere with the introduction of labour to 
the injury of any industry, but these Indians were brought here for the 
purpose of supplying labour for the development of local industries, and 
were not intended to form portion of the South African nation which was 
being built up in the various States. 
12. With the greatest deference 
to the learned Attorney-
General, your Memorialists humbly submit that the above re-
marks condemn entirely the clauses under discussion, and venture 
to believe that Her Majesty's Government will not endorse such 
remarks by sanctioning the Bill. 
13. Your Memorialists venture to think that it is against the 
spirit of the British Constitution to countenance measures that tend 
to keep men under perpetual bondage. That the Bill, if passed, 
would do so, it is submitted, is self-evident. 
14. The Natal Mercury, the Government organ, of the 11th 
May, 1895, thus justifies the measure: 
236 
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI 
This much, however, the Government cannot accede to, that men 
who contract at fair wages to assist the Colonists, should be allowed 
to break their contract, and remain competitors against the Colonists, those 
whom, and for no other purpose and no other condition, they came to 
serve. 
To do otherwise would be to destroy all distinction between right 
and wrong and to give tacit disavowal of the existence of law and equity. 
There is no desire for, nor is there any, harshness of any kind, nor is there 
anything to which unbiassed judgment can take exception. 
15. Your Memorialists have quoted the above to show what 
feeling exists even amongst responsible quarters against the Indians 
only because some very few dare to trade in the Colony, after 
having served as labourers, not only under and during their term 
of indenture, but a long time after the completion of their term. 
16. The statement requiring those who are admittedly indis-
pensable to the welfare of the Colony to remain either under perpe-
tual bondage or to "purchase freedom", as it is put by The Natal 
Advertiser, 9-5-95, by paying an annual tax of £3, "is neither harsh 
nor inequitable", will not, your Memorialists feel sure, be accep-
ted by Her Majesty's Government. 
17. The injustice of the clauses seems to be so evident and 
strong, that even The Natal Advertiser, a paper which is by no 
means favourable towards the Indian, felt it, and expressed it in 
the following terms on the 16th May, 1895: 
The penal clause of the Bill originally was to the effect that the 
Indians, failing to return to India, should pay "an annual tax to the 
Government". 
On Tuesday, the Attorney-General moved that this be al-
tered to read: "should take out a pass or licence to remain in the Colony", 
for which £3 would be payable. 
This is decidedly an alteration for the 
better, and effects the same end under less disagreeable terms. 
A broad 
question, however, is raised by this proposal to establish a special tax on 
the Coolie settlers. If such a disability is to be placed on Coolies coming 
from another part of the Empire, surely its application should be extended 
to include members of other non-European races, who have no con-
nection with the British Empire, such as Chinese, Arabs, Kaffirs from out-
side States, and all such visitors. 
To specially select the Coolies for atten-
tion in this way, and to allow all other aliens to settle with impunity, and 
without disability, is not an equitable arrangement. 
The practice of tax-
ing aliens, if it is to be inaugurated at all, should surely commence 
with those races not under the British flag in their native land, and not 
with those who, whether we like the fact or not, are the subjects of the 
same Sovereign as ourselves. 
These should be the last, not the first, to 
be placed by us under exceptional disabilities. 
MEMORIAL TO J. CHAMBERLAIN 
237 
18. Your Memorialists submit that the arrangement has not 
appealed to any fair-minded men at all. How the Indian Govern-
ment could be persuaded by the Natal Delegates to make a promise 
to sanction an indefinite extension of the indentures, or compulsory 
return, no matter how reluctantly, your Memorialists do not pro-
fess to know. But your Memorialists venture to hope that the 
case, as put here, on behalf of the indentured Indians will receive 
full attention from both Her Majesty's Government and the Indian 
Government, and that any sanction given on the representation 
of an ex parte Commission will not be allowed to prejudice the case 
of the indentured Indians. 
19. For the sake of ready reference your Memorialists beg 
leave to quote as follows from His Excellency the Viceroy's des-
patch to His Excellency the Governor of Natal, dated the 17th 
September, 1894: 
I should myself have preferred the continuance of the existing system 
under which it is open to an immigrant at the termination of his period 
of indenture to settle in the Colony on his own account, and I have little 
sympathy with the views that would prevent any subjects of the Crown 
from settling in any Colony under the British flag. 
But, in consideration 
of the feelings 
at present manifested in the Colony of Natal towards 
Indian settlers, I am prepared to accept the proposals (a to f) set forth 
by the Delegates in the memorandum of 20th January, 1894, referred to 
in the preceding paragraph, subject to the following provisions, viz.: 
(a) That a Coolie when first recruited shall be required by the 
terms of his contract to return to India, within or immediately on the 
expiration of the period of his indenture, unless he may prefer to re-enter 
into a further indenture on the same conditions; 
(b) 
that such Coolies as may refuse to return should in no case 
be made subject to penalties under criminal law, and 
(c) 
that all renewals shall be for a period of two years, and that a 
free passage should be secured to the immigrant at the end of the first 
term for which his engagement is made as well as at the end of every 
subsequent renewal. 
The alterations in the existing system which I am prepared to sanc-
tion with the approval of Her Majesty's Government may be sum-
marized as follows.1 
20. Your Memorialists notice with a feeling of relief that 
Her Majesty's Government have not yet approved of the suggestions 
of the Delegates. 
1 The original does not furnish the summary. 
238 
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI 
21. To show yet further how grossly unjust the adoption of 
the compulsory return or re-indenture has seemed from the first 
time that the idea was started, your Memorialists crave leave to 
quote from the report of and evidence taken before the Immigra-
tion Commission that sat in Natal in the year 1885. 
22. Mr. J. R. Saunders, one of the Commissioners, forcibly 
puts his views on the matter in his additional report in the fol-
lowing terms: 
Though the Commission has made no recommendation on the sub-
ject of passing a law to force Indians back to India at the expiration of 
their term of service unless they renew their indentures, I wish to ex-
press my strong condemnation of any such idea, and I feel convinced that 
many who now advocate the plan, when they realize what it means, will 
reject it as energetically as I do. 
Stop Indian immigration and face 
results, but don't try to do what I can show is a great wrong. 
What is it but taking the best out of servants (the good as well as 
the bad), and then refusing them the enjoyment of the reward! 
Forcing 
them back (if we could, but we cannot) when their best days have been 
spent for our benefit. Whereto? Why, back to face a prospect of starva-
tion from which they sought to escape when they were young. 
Shylock-
like, taking the pound of flesh, and 
Shylock-like we may rely on 
meeting—Shylock's reward. 
Stop Indian immigration if you will; if there are not enough un-
occupied houses now, empty more by clearing out Arabs and Indians 
who live in them, and who add to the productive and consuming power 
of a less than half-peopled country. 
But let us trace results in this one 
branch of the enquiry, taking it as an example of others and trace out how 
untenanted houses depreciate the value of properties and securities—how, 
out of this must result stagnation in the building trade and those other 
trades and stores for supplies dependent on it—follow out how this leads 
to a reduced demand for white mechanics, and with the reduction in 
spending power of so many, how fall of revenue is to be expected next, 
need of retrenchment or taxation, or both. 
Let this result and others, 
far too numerous to be calculated in detail, be faced, and if blind race senti-
mentalism or jealousy is to prevail, so be it. The Colony can stop Indian 
immigration, and that perhaps far more easily and permanently than some 
'popularity seekers' would desire. 
But force men off at the end of their 
service, this the Colony cannot do. 
And I urge on it not to discredit 
a fair name by trying. 
23. The late member of the late Legislative Council and the 
present Attorney-General (the Hon. Mr. Escombe), giving his 
evidence before the Commission, said (p. 177): 
MEMORIAL TO J. 
CHAMBERLAIN 
239 
With reference to time-expired Indians, I do not think that it ought 
to be compulsory on any man to go to any part of the world save for a 
crime for which he is transported; I hear a great deal of this question; 
I have been asked again and again to take a different view, but I have 
not been able to do it. A man is brought here, in theory with his own consent, in 
practice very often without his consent, (the italics are your Memorialists') 
he gives the best five years of his life, he forms new ties, forgets the old 
ones, perhaps establishes a home here, and he cannot, according to my 
view of right and wrong, be sent back. 
Better by far to stop the further 
introduction of Indians altogether than to take what work you can out 
of them and order them away. The Colony, or part of the Colony, seems 
to want Indians but also wishes to avoid the consequences of Indian im-
migration. 
The Indian people do no harm as far as I know; in certain 
respects they do a great deal of good. 
I have never heard a reason to 
justify the extradition of a man who has behaved well for five years. 
I 
do not think that the Indian, at the expiration of his five years' service, 
should be placed under police supervision unless he is a criminal. 
I know 
not why Arabs should be placed under police supervision more than 
Europeans. 
In cases of some Arabs the thing is simply ridiculous. 
They 
are men of large means, large connections, who are always used in trade 
if they can be dealt with more profitably than others. 
24. Your Memorialists, while drawing your attention to the 
above, cannot help expressing their regret that the gentleman 
who expressed the above views ten years ago should now be the 
member to introduce the Bill under discussion. 
25. Mr. H. Binns, who went with Mr. Mason as a delegate 
to induce the Indian Government to sanction the compulsory re-
turn or re-indenture, expressed the following opinion in giving his 
evidence before the Commission: 
I think the idea which has been mooted, that all Indians should 
be compelled to return to India at the end of their term of indenture, 
is most unfair to the Indian population, and would never be sanctioned by 
the Indian Government. 
In my opinion the free Indian population is 
a most useful section of the community. 
A large proportion of them, 
considerably larger than is generally supposed, are in service in the Colony, 
particularly employed as house servants in the towns and villages. 
Before 
there was a free Indian population the towns of Pietermaritzburg and 
Durban had no supply of fruit, vegetables and fish. At present all these 
things are fully supplied. 
We have never had any immigrants from 
Europe who have shown any inclination to become market gardeners and 
fishermen, and I am of opinion that but for the free Indian population, 
the markets of Pietermaritzburg and Durban would be as badly supplied 
now as they were ten years ago (pp. 155-6). 
240 
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI 
26. The present Chief Justice and the then Attorney-General 
expressed the following opinion: 
I object to any alteration in the terms of the laws under which 
Indians are introduced into the Colony. 
In my opinion the numbers 
of the Indians who have been introduced have in a great measure pro-
vided on the coast for the failure of white immigrants, and have culti-
vated lands, which would otherwise remain uncultivated with the crops 
which are of real advantage to the inhabitants of the Colony. 
Many 
who have not availed themselves of the return passage to India have 
turned out to be trusty and useful domestic servants (p. 327). 
27. It is yet possible to take out extracts from the same volu-
minous report and evidence to show what the most distinguished 
men in the Colony have thought about the arrangement. 
28. Your Memorialists further beg to draw your attention to 
the following from Messrs Binns and Mason's Report: 
So far, no second term of indenture has been agreed to in the case 
of any country to which Coolies emigrated, although the consent of the 
Government of India has been frequently asked for, and in no case has 
the condition of compulsory return at the end of the indenture been 
sanctioned. 
29. It has been said in the Colony, in defence of the measure, 
that there can be no injustice, where two parties voluntarily agree 
to do a certain thing, and that the Indians before coming to Natal 
will know under what conditions they will go to Natal. 
This 
point has been dealt with in the petitions to the Hon. the Legis-
lative Assembly, and the Hon. the Legislative Council, and your 
Memorialists venture to repeat that, when the contracting parties 
are not situated equally, the proposition is entirely inapplicable. 
An Indian who, in order "to escape from starvation", as Mr. Saun-
ders has put it, seeks indenture can hardly be called a free agent. 
30. So recently as 1894, the evidence as to the indispensable-
ness of the Indian has been dwelt upon in the Protector's Report 
referred to above. At p. 15 he says: 
If it were possible even for a short space of time to withdraw the 
whole of the Indian population from this Colony, I am convinced that, 
with but very few exceptions, every industry in existence at the present 
time would collapse, solely for the want of reliable labour. 
There is no 
getting over the fact that the Native as a rule will not work, hence it 
is generally admitted throughout the Colony that without the Indian 
as a labourer, no industry, agricultural or otherwise, of any importance could 
possibly be carried on successfully, and not only this but almost every 
householder in Natal would be without domestic servants. 
MEMORIAL TO J. CHAMBERLAIN 
241 
31. If almost the whole current of what may be called expert 
opinion, from beginning up to date, goes to show the usefulness of 
the Indians, then, your Memorialists submit, it is not too much 
to say that to keep such people under perpetual bondage, or to 
make them pay a yearly tax of £3 whether they can afford it or 
not, is, to say the very least, absolutely one-sided and selfish. 
32. Your Memorialists beg respectfully to draw your atten-
tion to the fact that, were the Bill to become law, the very object 
of immigration will be frustrated in all its aspects. If it is to ena-
ble the Indians to improve their material condition ultimately, 
the object certainly will not be fulfilled by compelling them to 
remain under perpetual indenture. If it be to relieve the over-
crowded parts of India, that object also will be frustrated. For, the 
object of the Bill is not to allow the number of Indians in the 
Colony to increase. The desire is to replace those who can no longer 
bear the yoke of indenture by fresh importation, and to force the 
former back to India. Thus your Memorialists humbly submit that 
the last state will be worse than the first. For, while the number of 
Indians in the overcrowded districts, so far as Natal as an outlet 
is concerned, will remain the same, those who would return against 
their will cannot but be a source of additional anxiety and trouble, 
because they, being without any prospect of work or any capital 
to maintain them, may have to be maintained at the public ex-
pense. It may be said in reply to this objection that it presuppo-
ses a state of things which will never happen, that is to say, the 
Indians will gladly pay the annual tax. Your Memorialists, however, 
beg leave to point out that such an argument, if advanced, would 
really go to prove that the clauses about re-indenture and tax are 
absolutely useless, in so far as they will not produce the desired 
effect. It has never been contended that the object is to raise any 
revenue. 
33. Your Memorialists, therefore, submit that, if the Colony 
cannot put up with the Indians, the only course, in your Memo-
rialists' humble opinion, is to stop all future immigration to Natal, 
at any rate for the time being. Your Memorialists beg respectfully, 
but emphatically, to protest against an arrangement that gives all 
the benefit to one party only, and that, indeed, the least in need of 
it. Such stopping of immigration will not, your Memorialists sub-
mit, materially affect the congested parts of India. 
34. Your Memorialists have so far discussed both the inden-
ture and the licence clauses together. 
As to the latter, your 
Memorialists beg to draw your attention to the fact that even in 
the Transvaal—a foreign State—the Government have not ven-
I-16 
242 
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI 
tured to levy an annual tax on the Indians who go there of their 
own accord and on their own means. There is only a licence of £3 
10s to be taken out once for all. And this too has, your Memo-
rialists understand, among other things, formed the subject of a 
memorial1 to Her Majesty's Government. Moreover, the licence 
in this case is an annual tax in its most obnoxious form. 
This tax 
has to be paid whether the unfortunate victim has the means or 
not. When a member, during the discussion, asked how the tax 
will be collected if any Indian objected to or did not pay it, the 
Hon. Attorney-General remarked that there would always be 
found sufficient in the defaulting Indian's house to attach under 
a summary process! 
Lastly, your Memorialists submit that the introduction of the 
licence clause goes beyond the limits laid down by the Viceroy's 
Despatch referred to above. 
In conclusion, your Memorialists most earnestly pray and 
confidently hope that Her Majesty's Government will come to the 
conclusion that the clauses discussed herein are manifestly unjust, 
and will, therefore, be pleased to disallow the Indian Immigration 
Amendment Bill referred to above, or grant such other relief as 
may meet the ends of justice. 
And for this act of justice and mercy, your Memorialists, as 
in duty bound, shall for ever pray, etc., etc. 
From a photostat of a printed copy: S.N. 433 
