68. 
MEMORIAL TO LORD ELGIN 
[DURBAN, 
August 11, 1895] 
TO 
HIS EXCELLENCY THE RIGHT HONOURABLE LORD ELGIN, 
VICEROY AND GOVERNOR-GENERAL OF INDIA IN COUNCIL, 
CALCUTTA 
THE 
MEMORIAL 
OF 
THE 
UNDERSIGNED 
INDIANS 
IN 
THE 
COLONY 
OF 
NATAL 
HUMBLY SHEWETH THAT: 
Your Memorialists, who are Her Majesty's Indian subjects, 
crave leave to draw Your Excellency's attention to the humble 
1 The text of this is not available. 
MEMORIAL TO LORD ELGIN 
243 
Memorial1 addressed to Her Majesty's Government with regard to 
certain clauses of the Indian Immigration Law Amendment Bill 
which was recently passed by the Hon. the Legislative Assembly 
and the Hon. the Legislative Council of Natal, and which is partly 
based upon Your Excellency's Dispatch to His Excellency the Gov-
ernor of Natal on the subject thereof, a copy of which is annexed 
hereto. 
Besides drawing Your Excellency's attention to the above 
memorial, your Memorialists beg respectfully to state as follows 
with regard to the Bill: 
Your Excellency's Memorialists have noticed with regret 
that Your Excellency is disposed to sanction the principle of com-
pulsory re-indenture, or compulsory return. 
Your Memorialists also regret that they did not send a re-
presentation at the time the Delegates set out for India.2 It will 
be idle to discuss the causes that prevented such a course from being 
adopted. 
Your Memorialists, however, confidently hope that 
the wrong inflicted would be so great, in case the Bill became law, 
that the above omission will not come in the way of its being 
averted. 
Your Memorialists, with the greatest deference, venture to 
point out that, if the non-compliance with the condition as to 
compulsory return could not set the criminal law in motion, the 
insertion in the contracts of such a clause is absolutely useless, if 
not actually harmful, inasmuch as it might encourage the con-
tracting party to break his contract, and the law would connive at 
such a breach. And since such extreme precaution pre-supposes 
the injustice of the contract, your Memorialists respectfully submit 
that the reasons adduced for inducing the sanction are absolutely 
insufficient, if any reasons could justify it. 
As has been hinted at in the annexure, your Memorialists 
implore Your Excellency not to sanction any of the clauses objec-
ted to, but, in accordance with the emphatically expressed opi-
nions of Mr. J. R. Saunders and the Hon. Mr. Escombe quoted 
in the annexure3, to stop immigration to Natal. 
Your Memorialists respectfully beg to protest against any sec-
tion of Her Majesty's subjects, be they the poorest, being practical-
ly enslaved or subjected to a special, obnoxious poll-tax, in order 
that a body of Colonists, who already have been deriving the great-
est benefits from such subjects, may be able to satisfy their whims 
1 & 2 Vide the preceding item. 
3 Vide pp. 238-9. 
244 
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI 
or desire to exact more from the same men without any return 
whatsoever. In calling the idea of compulsory re-indenture, or in 
lieu thereof, of a poll-tax, a whim, your Memorialists believe they 
have used the right expression. For, your Memorialists firmly 
believe there would be no cause for alarm even if the Indian popu-
lation were trebled in the Colony. 
But, your Memorialists humbly submit that, in a matter like the 
above, the wish of the Colony cannot guide Your Excellency's deci-
sion, but that the interests of the Indians affected by the clauses 
should also be considered. And your Memorialists have no hesita-
tion in submitting, with all due respect, that the clauses, if ever sanc-
tioned, will be a grave injustice and wrong to the most helpless 
of Her Majesty's Indian subjects. 
Five years' indenture, your Memorialists submit, is long 
enough to undergo. To raise it to an indefinite period would mean 
that an Indian who cannot pay a poll-tax of £3 or return to 
India must for ever remain without freedom, without any prospect 
of ever bettering his condition, without ever even thinking of 
changing his hut, his meagre allowance and ragged clothes, for a 
better house, enjoyable food and respectable clothing. He must 
not even think of educating his children according to his own taste 
or comforting his wife with any pleasure or recreation. Your 
Memorialists submit that a life of semi-starvation in India, but of 
freedom, and among friends and relations in the same state would 
certainly be better and more desirable than the above. In this 
case the Indian may expect and get the chance to better his lot, 
in that, never. That, your Memorialists submit and believe, never 
was the object of encouraging immigration. 
In conclusion, therefore, your Memorialists earnestly pray and 
confidently hope that, if the Colony does not want the Indian 
immigration without the arrangement objected to being sanc-
tioned, Your Excellency may be graciously pleased to stop future 
immigration to Natal, or grant such other relief as may seem just. 
And for this act of justice and mercy, your Memorialists, as 
in duty bound, shall for ever pray, etc., etc.1 
ABDUL KARIM HAJEE ADAM 
AND OTHERS 
From a photostat of a printed copy: S.N. 432 
1 The appeal was infructuous. 
The Government of India's feeble protest 
about the authority and functions of the Protector of Immigrants as provided 
for in the new Immigration Amendment Bill was ignored. 
The Secretary of State 
sought the Viceroy's reconsideration of the Bill in the light of the Natal peti-
