69. 
REPORT OF THE NATAL INDIAN CONGRESS 
August, 1895 
ITS FOUNDATION 
During the month of June in the year 1894 the Natal Gov-
ernment introduced a Bill called the Franchise Law Amendment 
Bill in the Legislative Assembly. It was recognized that it threaten-
ed the very existence of the Indians in the Colony. Meetings were 
held on the premises of Messrs Dada Abdulla & Co. to consider 
what steps should be taken to prevent the Bill from passing. Peti-
tions were sent to both the Houses, Members of which were inter-
viewed by a representative who went from Durban to P.M. Burg. 
The Bill, however, passed both the Houses. The effect of the agi-
tation was that all the Indians recognized the absolute necessity 
of establishing a permanent institution that would cope with the 
legislative activity, of a retrograde character, of the first Respon-
sible Government of the Colony with regard to the Indians, and 
protect Indian interests. 
After a few preliminary meetings had been held on Messrs 
Dada Abdulla's premises, the Natal Indian Congress was formally 
established on the 22nd August amidst great enthusiasm. All the 
leading members of the Indian community joined the Congress. 
Seventy-six members subscribed on the first evening. The list gra-
dually rose to 228. Mr. Abdulla Haji Adam was elected president. 
Other prominent members were made vice-presidents. Mr. M. K. 
Gandhi was elected Hon. Secretary. A small committee, too, 
was formed. But, as the other members of the Congress expressed 
a wish to attend the committee meetings during the early days of 
the Congress, the committee was tacitly abolished and all the mem-
bers were invited to the meetings. 
The minimum monthly subscription was 5/-. 
There was 
no maximum limit. Two members subscribed £2 each monthly, 
one 25/-, ten 20/-, twenty-five 10/-, three 7/6, three 5/3, two 5/1, 
and one hundred and eighty-seven subscribed 5/- each, monthly. 
————————————
tions pending Royal assent to it. 
Lord Elgin only reiterated his earlier view. 
(Vide The Early Phase, pp. 521-2). 
The Bill received Royal sanction and be-
came Law on August 18, 1896. 
246 
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA 
GANDHI 
The following table shows the various classes of members with the 
subscriptions paid by them, the deficiency, etc.1 
————————————————————————————————————————
Yearly 
Class 
No. 
£ 
s d 
Actual receipts 
Deficiency 
————————————————————————————————————————
40/-
2 
48- 0-0 
£ 48- 0-0 
Nil 
25/-
1 
15- 0-0 
£ 15- 0-0 
Nil 
20/-
10 
120- 0-0 
£ 93- 0-0 
£ 27- 0-0 
10/-
22 
132- 0-0 
£ 88- 5-0 
£ 43-15-0 
7/6 
3 
13-10-0 
£ 
8-12-6 
£ 
4-17-6 
5/3 
2 
6- 6-0 
£ 
3- 8-3 
£ 
2-17-9 
5/1 
2 
6- 2-0 
£ 
5- 6-9 
£ 
0-15-3 
5/-
187 
559-10-0 
£273- 5-0 
£286-15-0 
————————————————————————————————————————
228 
900- 8-0 
£535-17-6 
£366- 0-6 
————————————————————————————————————————
It will be seen from the above that, out of a possible income 
of £900-8-0, the Congress has been so far successful in col-
lecting only £500-17-6 or nearly 50%. The 5/- subscribers have 
been the greatest defaulters. The causes are many. It should be 
borne in mind that some joined at a very late stage and, natu-
rally, have not paid for the whole year. Many have left for India, 
a few are too poor to pay. The most potent cause, however, it is 
regrettable to mention, has been the unwillingness to pay. It is 
possible to collect over 30% of the remainder if some workers 
came forward and exerted themselves. The following is a list2 of dona-
tions, general and special, for the Bennett case, as also the sub-
scriptions from Newcastle and Charlestown. 
The list has been given in full because these names do not 
appear on the printed lists. Thus the total receipts are: 
Subscriptions 
£535-17-6 
Donations 
£ 80-17-0 
———— 
£616-14-6 
———— 
The above is worked on the basis of the printed list. 
Now the deposits in the Bank amount to £598-19-11. In 
order to arrive at the above sum the cash expenses and the trans-
fers have to be added. 
1 The table does not tally with the figures given above and the totals 
also are not all correct. 
2 Not reproduced here 
REPORT OF THE NATAL INDIAN CONGRESS 
247 
The cash expenses are £7-5-1. 
The transfers amount to 
£10-10-0, being £8, rent to Mr. Naidoo which was remitted in 
lieu of subscriptions, £2, rent not charged by Mr. Abdul Kadir 
and 10/-, rent not charged by Mr. Moosa H. Adam in lieu of his 
subscription. Thus 
£598-19-11 
£ 7- 5- 1 
£ 10-10- 0 
—————— 
£616-15- 0 
—————— 
Thus, on comparing the deposits with the printed list, we have 
a difference of six pence which represent 6d received but not 
specified in the list. This happens because one member once paid 
2/6 and another time 3/-. The 3/- could not be well represented on 
the list. 
The expenses by cheque up to date amount to £151-11-1½.
A full statement1 is annexed hereto. This leaves a credit balance 
at the Bank of £447-8-9½. The liabilities are not yet discharged 
and the expenses of the Immigration petition and the tickets 
referred to below. 
The rules as to drawing cheques have been strictly adhered 
to. Although the Hon. Secy. has the power to sign cheques, alone, 
up to £5, the power has never been availed of. They are signed 
by him and Mr. Abdul Karim and, in his absence, by Mr. Dora-
samy Pillay and Mr. P. Dowji and, in his absence, by Mr. Hoosen 
Cassim. 
THE 
CONGRESS 
ACTIVITY: 
ITS 
WORK, 
ITS WORKERS AND ITS TROUBLES 
To take the last first, the Congress has passed through quite 
enough of troubles. It was early seen that the collection of sub-
scriptions was an uphill task. Various suggestions were put forward, 
but none proved absolutely successful. At last some workers volun-
teered and, as a result of their labours, it is possible to show a 
balance of even £448. Mr. Parsee Rustomjee, Mr. Abdul Kadir, 
Mr. Abdul Karim, Mr. Dorasamy, Mr. Dowji Kathrada, Mr. Ran-
deri, Mr. Hoosen Cassim, Mr. Peerun Mahomed, Mr. G. H. 
Miankhan and Mr. Amod Jeewa have, at one time or another, 
striven to get in the subscriptions. All, or most of them, more than 
once went round for subscriptions. Mr. Abdul Kadir alone, at his 
own expense, went to P. M. Burg and collected nearly £50, but 
1 Not reproduced here 
248 
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI 
for which most of the sum might have been lost to the Con-
gress. Mr. Abdul Karim at his expense went up to Verulam and 
collected nearly £25. 
There was also a difference among the prominent members 
as to signing the cheques. The rule originally was to have them 
signed by the Hon. Secy. and countersigned by one of the following: 
Mr. Abdulla H. Adam, Mr. Moosa Haji Cassim, Mr. P. Dowji 
Mahomed, Mr. Hoosen Cassim, Mr. Abdul Kadir and Mr. Dora-
samy Pillay. A suggestion was made that more should sign. At 
one time this difference threatened the very existence of the Con-
gress, but the good sense of the members and their anxiety to pre-
vent such a catastrophe ultimately dispelled the cloud. And the 
change above mentioned was agreed to unanimously. 
As soon as the Congress was fairly started in Durban, Messrs 
Dowd Mahomed, Moosa Haji Adam, Mahomed Cassim Jeeva, 
Mr. Parsee Rustomjee, 
Mr. Peerun Mahomed and the Hon. 
Secy. went up, each at his own expense, to canvass for members 
in P. M. Burg. A meeting was held there and about 48 subscribed. 
A second similar meeting was held at Verulam where about 37 
subscribed. Mr. Hoosen Cassim, Mr. Haji, Mr. Dowd, Mr. Moosa 
Haji Cassim, Mr. Parsee Rustomjee, and the Hon. Secy. went up 
there. Messrs Amod Bhayat, Haji Mahomed and Camroodeen 
rendered active help in P. M. Burg and Messrs Ebrahim Moosaji 
Amod, Amod Meter and P. Naidoo, in Verulam. 
Mr. Ameerodeen, although not a member of the Congress, 
did much needed work for the Congress. Mr. N. D. Joshi has been 
good enough to make a fair copy of the report in Gujarati. 
Mr. Somasundram, in the earlier part of the Congress year, 
helped it by interpreting at the meetings and distributing circulars. 
Work has also been done in Newcastle and Charlestown. Mem-
bers have subscribed for the second year. 
Mr. Mahomed Sidat and Mr. Suliman Ebrahim and Mr. 
Mahomed Meer worked indefatigably in Newcastle. They and 
Mr. Dowd Amla went also to Charlestown at their expense. The 
Charlestown people responded splendidly. Within an hour all 
the available men subscribed. Mr. Dindar, Mr. Goolam Russul 
and Mr. Vanda rendered much help. Nearly 1,000 letters have 
been written to the friends of the Indians in England and India 
in connection with the Franchise petition, Transvaal petition and 
the Immigration petition to the Home Government. 
The Immigration law, which contemplates imposition of a 
£3 tax in lieu of indenture, has been strenuously opposed. Petitions 
were presented to both the Houses. 
REPORT OF THE NATAL INDIAN CONGRESS 
249 
The Transvaal petition, though not sent directly under the 
auspices of the Congress, cannot but be referred to in a review 
of the Congress work. 
According to the spirit or the object of the Congress, an open 
letter was written to members of both the Houses and widely circu-
lated in the Colony and South Africa. It was widely noticed by 
the papers and gave rise to much sympathetic private correspon-
dence. Letters, too, occasionally appeared in the newspapers on 
the position of the Indians in Natal. A correspondence was car-
ried on by the late President with the Government in connection 
with the separate entrances for the Europeans and Natives and 
Asiatics at the Post Office. 
The result has not been altogether unsatisfactory. Separate 
entrances will now be provided for 
the 
three 
communities. 
Work has also been done among the indentured Indians. Bala-
sundram, who was badly treated by his master, was transferred to 
Mr. Askew. 
The Congress interfered on behalf of the indentured Indians 
in the Railway department, in connection with the Mohurrum 
festivals as well as supply of wood instead of coal. Much sympathy 
was shown by the Magistrate presiding. 
The Tuohy case is also worthy of mention. Judgment was 
recorded for Ismail Amod whose hat was taken off forcibly in a pub-
lic place and who was otherwise ill-treated. 
The famous Bennett case cost the Congress a great deal, but 
it is believed that the money has not been thrown away. That 
we should not get judgment against the Magistrate was a fore-
gone conclusion. We went to court in spite of Mr. Morecom's opi-
nion to the contrary. It has, however, made the position much 
clearer and we know exactly what we should do should a simi-
lar case occur in future. 
While the Indian cause has not received much active support 
from the Europeans in the Colony, much sympathy has been 
evoked both in India and England. The London Times and The 
Times of India have actively supported the Indians in South Africa. 
The British Committee of the National Congress has been very 
vigilant. Letters of sympathy have been received from Sir W. W. 
Hunter, Mr. A. Webb 1, the Hon. Pherozeshah Mehta, the Hon. 
1 Alfred Webb: Member of Parliament. Contributed frequently to India 
and other periodicals on South African Indian topics; was President of the 
Congress at its Madras session (1894) and a member of the British Com-
mittee. 
250 
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI 
Fazalbhai Visram and others. Other Indian and English papers 
have also viewed our complaints favourably. 
Mr. Askew was the only European who attended the Congress 
meetings. The Congress has not yet made itself officially known 
to the public because it was thought advisable not to do so unless 
it was assured of a permanent existence. 
It has worked very 
quietly. 
This review of the work of the Congress may close fittingly 
with a mention of the address that was presented to Mr. Abdulla 
Haji Adam, the late President, on his departure for India. 
GIFTS TO THE CONGRESS 
These have been quite varied and numerous. Mr. Parsee 
Rustomjee stands foremost in this respect. He has supplied it with 
three lamps, tablecloth, a clock, a door-blind, 
inkstands, pens, 
blotting-paper, flower-pot and also oil throughout the year. 
He 
has sent his men to sweep and light the hall on every meeting 
day with extraordinary punctuality. 
He has also supplied the 
Congress with 4,000 circulars. Mr. Abdul Kadir had the list of 
members printed. 
Mr. C. M. Jeewa had 2,000 circulars printed gratis, paper 
for which was supplied partly by Mr. Haji Mahomed and partly 
by Mr. Hoosen Cassim. 
Mr. Abdulla Haji Adam has made a gift of a carpet. Mr. 
Manekji provided a table. 
Mr. Pragji Bhimbhai gave 1,000 envelopes. 
The Hon. Secretary got the rules printed in India in Guja-
rati and English and supplied stamps, papers, etc., for the normal 
fortnightly circulars. 
Mr. Lawrence, a non-member, has been doing the work of 
distributing circulars with quiet zeal. 
MISCELLANEOUS 
The attendance has been very poor and painfully unpunctual. 
The Tamil members have not shown much zeal in the Congress 
work. 
They might, at any rate, have made up for the laxity in 
paying by attending punctually and regularly. In order to facili-
tate canvassing for small donations, tickets for one shilling, two shil-
lings and two shillings and six pence, initialled by Mr. A. H. Adam, 
Mr. Abdul Kadir, Mr. D. Pillay and the Hon. Secy., have been 
issued, but no forecast can yet be made as to the results of the 
plan. 
A resolution has also been passed to the effect that medals 
LETTER TO "THE NATAL MERCURY" 
251 
should be awarded to active workers in order to encourage them. 
They have not yet been prepared. 
DEATH AND DEPARTURE 
It has to be noted with regret that Mr. Dinsha died a few 
months ago. 
About 10 members have left for India, among whom may 
be mentioned, besides the late president, Mr. Haji Mahomed, Mr. 
Haji Suliman, Mr. Haji Dada, Mr. Manekji. Mr. Muthukrishna 
and Mr. Ranjitsingh have resigned. 
About 20 members never paid any subscription at all, who 
also may be considered as having never joined the Congress. 
SUGGESTIONS 
The most important suggestion that has to be made is that, 
whatever the subscription, it must be made payable for the whole 
year in advance. 
FURTHER REMARKS 
It should be noted that some expenses though voted by the 
Congress have not been incurred. Economy has been strictly ob-
served. At least £2,000 are needed to put the Congress on a sure 
foundation. 
From a copy 
