7. 
INDIAN VEGETARIANS–I 
India is inhabited by twenty-five millions1 of people of various 
castes and creeds. The very common belief among the Englishmen 
who have not been to India, or who have taken very little inte-
rest in Indian matters, is that all the Indians are born vegetarians. 
Now this is true only in part. Indian people are divided into three 
main divisions, viz., the Hindus, the Mahommedans, and the Parsis. 
The Hindus are again divided into four chief castes, viz., the 
Brahmins, the Kshatriyas, the Vaisyas, and the Sudras. Of all 
these, in theory, only the Brahmins and the Vaisyas are pure 
vegetarians. 
But in practice almost all the Indians are vege-
tarians. Some are so voluntarily, and others compulsorily. 
The 
latter, though always willing to take, are yet too poor to buy 
meat. This statement will be borne out by the fact that there are 
thousands in India who have to live on one pice (⅓d.) a day. 
These live on bread and salt, a heavily taxed article; for even in 
a poverty-stricken country like India, it will be very difficult, if 
not utterly impossible, to get eatable flesh-meat for ⅓d. 
The question who are vegetarians in India being disposed of, 
the natural question will be what is vegetarianism as practised 
by them? 
To begin with, Indian vegetarianism does not mean 
the V.E.M.2 diet. The Indians, i.e., the Indian vegetarians, decline 
to take, besides fish, flesh and fowl, eggs, for they argue that to 
eat an egg is equivalent to killing life; since an egg, if left undis-
turbed would, prima facie, become a fowl. But, unlike some of the 
vegetarian extremists here, they not only do not abstain from 
milk and butter, but consider them sacred enough to be used on 
what are called "fruit-days", which occur every fortnight, and 
which are generally observed by the high-caste Hindus; because, 
as they put it, they do not kill the cow in taking milk from her. 
And certainly the milking of a cow, which, by the way, has been 
the subject of painting and poetry, cannot shock the most delicate 
feelings as would the slaughtering of her. It may be worth men-
tioning en passant that the cow is an object of worship among the 
Hindus, and a movement set on foot to prevent the cows from being 
shipped off for the purposes of slaughter is progressing rapidly. 
The Vegetarian, 7-2-1891 
1 Obviously, a slip for crores 
2 V.E.M. probably means vegetables, eggs, milk. 
