70. 
LETTER TO "THE NATAL MERCURY" 
DURBAN, 
September 2, 1895 
TO 
THE EDITOR 
The Natal Mercury 
SIR, 
I would take the liberty to make a few remarks on your 
leaderettes on the recent cables about the Indians in South Africa. 
It is not for the first time that you have said that the people in 
South Africa object to give the Indians equal political rights be-
cause they do not enjoy them in India, and that you would not 
object to give them the same rights as they enjoy in India. 
As 
I have said elsewhere, I repeat here that, in theory at any rate, 
the Indians do enjoy equal political rights with the Europeans in 
252 
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI 
India. The Charter of 1833 and the Proclamation of 1858 guaran-
tee the Indians the same rights and privileges as are enjoyed by 
Her Majesty's other subjects. 
And the Indians in this Colony, as 
well as in other parts of South Africa, would be quite satisfied 
if they could only enjoy the same rights that they would enjoy under 
similar circumstances. 
In India, whenever the Europeans are allowed to vote, the 
Indians are not excluded. If the former have votes at the muni-
cipal elections, so have the latter. If the former can elect or 
become elected members of the Legislative Council, so can the 
latter. If the former can walk about freely after 9 p.m., so can 
the latter. 
The latter cannot possess themselves with arms as 
freely as the former. 
The Indians in South Africa also have no 
very great anxiety to arm themselves. 
There is no poll-tax in 
India. 
Will you be good enough to protest against the recent 
Immigration Act and earn the gratitude of the helpless indentured 
Indians? 
It is the same recognized principle of political equality 
that enabled Mr. Naoroji to enter the House of Commons. 
If you object to the Indian having the same rights because 
"British energy and money" have built up this Colony, you 
should clearly object to the Germans and the French also. 
On 
the same principle, the descendants of the pioneers who shed their 
blood may well object to even those coming from England and 
pushing them out. 
Is this not a narrow and selfish view of the 
matter? At times I read in your leaders expressions of very lofty 
and humanitarian sentiments. 
Unfortunately for the poor Indian, 
these sentiments are set aside when you deal with the Indian 
question. 
And yet, whether you like it or not, he is your fellow-
subject. 
England does not want to let go her hold of India, and 
at the same time she does not want to rule her with an iron 
rod. 
Her statesmen say that they want so much to endear the 
English rule to the Indians that they would not have any other. 
Would not views such as those expressed by you retard the ful-
filment of those wishes? 
I know very few Indians who, though they may be earning 
£1,000, live as if they were earning only £50. 
The fact is that, 
perhaps, there is no Indian in the Colony who alone earns £1,000 
per year. 
There are some whose trade would lead others to be-
lieve that they must be "making a pile". The trade of some of 
them is certainly very large; not so the profit, because it is shared 
by many. 
The Indian loves trade, and so long as he can earn 
a decent living, he does not mind sharing his profit largely with 
others. 
He does not insist upon the lion's share. Just like the 
LETTER TO "THE NATAL MERCURY" 
253 
European, the Indian also loves spending his money, only not so 
recklessly. 
Every merchant who has amassed a fortune in Bombay 
has built for himself palatial buildings. The only palatial build-
ing in Mombassa has been built by an Indian. 
Indian merchants 
have earned much in Zanzibar, and consequently have built palaces, 
and, in some instances, pleasure houses also. If no Indian has 
done so in Durban or South Africa it is because he has not earned 
sufficient to enable him so to do. 
Sir, if you will only study the 
question a little more closely (pardon me for so saying), you will 
find that the Indians spend in this Colony quite as much as they 
can without coming to grief. 
To say that those earning well 
sleep on the floors of their shops is, I venture to say, rather in-
correct. If you would undeceive yourself, and if you will leave 
your editorial chair for a few hours, I would escort you to some 
Indian stores. 
Then, perhaps, you would think much less harshly 
of them than now. 
I humbly believe that the Indian question, at any rate for 
the British Colonies, has a local as well as Imperial significance, 
and I submit that to lose temper over it, or to shut one's eyes to 
actual facts, in order to form preconceived ideas, is not exactly 
the way to solve it satisfactorily. It behoves responsible persons 
in the Colony not to widen the gulf between the two communities, 
but, if possible, to bridge it. 
Having invited the Indians to the 
Colony, how can the responsible Colonists curse them? 
How 
can they escape the natural consequences of the introduction of the 
Indian labour? 
I am, etc., 
M. K. GANDHI 
The Natal Mercury, 5-9-1895 
