71. LETTER TO "THE NATAL MERCURY"1 
DURBAN, 
September 15, 1895 
TO 
THE EDITOR 
The Natal Mercury 
SIR, 
I would venture to make a few remarks in reply to Mr. T. 
Marston Francis's letter on the Indian question. 
I believe your correspondent's description of the Indian muni-
cipalities, as also of the Legislative Councils, is not quite accurate. 
To mention only one instance, I do not think that the chairman 
of an Indian municipality must be a covenanted civilian. 
The 
present president of the Bombay Corporation is an Indian solicitor. 
I have never contended—nor do I contend now—that the 
franchise is as extensive in India as it is here. 
It would also be 
idle for me to say that the Legislative Councils in India are as 
representative as the Legislative Assembly here. What I do con-
tend, however, is that, whatever the limits of the franchise in 
India, it is extended to all without distinction of colour. 
The fact 
that the Indian's ability to understand representative government 
has been recognized cannot be gainsaid. What Mr. Francis says, 
viz., that the qualifications for the franchise are not the same in 
India as in Natal, has never been denied. 
Under such a test no 
one coming from even Europe would be entitled to the franchise, 
for the qualifications in the different European States are not 
surely the same as here. 
This week's mail brings the latest proof that the Indians have 
never failed in the real and only test, viz., whether or not they 
understand the principle of representation. 
I quote from the article 
on "Indian Affairs" in The Times: 
1 Controverting Gandhiji's plea for granting the franchise to Indians in 
South Africa, Mr. Marston T. Francis, who had lived several years in India, 
wrote in The Natal Mercury, 6-9-1895, that though Indians in India could vote 
at municipal elections and become members of the Legislative Council, things 
were so constituted that they could never outvote the European members or 
arrogate to themselves supreme authority. 
The chairman of a municipality, he 
said, was always a covenanted officer of the Indian Civil Service, and the 
Commissioner of the Division, the Governor, the Viceroy, the Secretary of 
State for India, and ultimately the British Parliament could impose checks on 
the municipalities and legislative bodies of India. 
LETTER TO "THE NATAL MERCURY" 
255 
But if the gallantry of the native soldiers who obtained recognition 
stirs within us a pride in having such fellow-subjects .... Indeed, nothing 
could exceed their magnificent self-devotion to their comrades in that deadly 
pass .... The truth is that the Indians are earning the right to be 
regarded as worthy fellow-subjects in more ways than one. 
The battle-
field has always formed the short cut to an honourable equality among 
races. 
But the Indians are also proving their title to our respect by the 
slower and more difficult methods of civil life. 
There was a greater ex-
periment made in the constitutional government of dependencies than the 
expansion of the Indian Legislative Council on a partially elective basis 
three years ago. . . . Many of the discussions have been most helpful, and 
so far as Bengal is concerned—the province in which the elective system 
seemed fraught with the greatest difficulty—the experiment, after a severe 
trial, has proved a success. 
This, as is well known, is from the pen of a historian1 and 
Indian officer who has served in India for 30 years. 
Disfran-
chisement by itself may seem to some to be very insignificant. 
But its consequences to the Indian community are too dreadful 
to contemplate. 
Its corresponding advantages to the European 
Colonists, I am convinced, are nil, unless there be anything grati-
fying in degrading or keeping under degradation a race or nation. 
There is no question of "the white man or the yellow man ruling", 
and I hope to be able to show, on a future occasion, that the 
fears entertained on that score are entirely groundless. 
There are passages in Mr. Francis's letter which would, 
perhaps, show that he must have left India very long ago. 
There 
are very few posts more responsible than that of a civil commissioner, 
and yet the Secretary of State for India only recently thought it 
prudent to appoint an Indian to that post. 
Mr. Francis knows 
what jurisdiction a Chief Justice in India enjoys, and an Indian 
has occupied that position both in Bengal and Madras. 
Those 
who wish to bind the two races—the British and the Indian—with 
"the silken cord of love" will not find it difficult to notice in-
numerable points of contact between the two. 
Even the three 
religions of the two, in spite of their apparent antagonism, have 
much in common, and would not form a bad unity in trinity. 
I am, etc., 
M. K. GANDHI 
The Natal Mercury, 23-9-1895 
1 Sir. W. W. Hunter 
