72. 
LETTER TO "THE NATAL ADVERTISER" 
DURBAN, 
September 23, 1895 
TO 
THE EDITOR 
The Natal Advertiser 
SIR, 
Your remarks in your Saturday's issue on the "Indian Con-
gress", or more correctly, "The Natal Indian Congress", are 
premature, seeing that the case1 in which the name has been used 
is not yet over. 
Were I not afraid of running the risk of com-
mitting contempt of court I would make a few remarks on the 
circumstances under which the Congress has been connected with 
the case. 
I am, therefore, obliged to postpone any remarks on the 
matter till the case is over. 
In the meanwhile, in order to remove any misimpression your 
remarks may create, I would, with your kind permission, set out 
the objects of the Congress. 
They are: 
"(1) To bring about a better understanding, and to promote 
friendliness between the Europeans and the Indians residing in 
the Colony. 
"(2) To spread information about India and the Indians by 
writing to newspapers, publishing pamphlets, lecturing, etc. 
"(3) To educate the Indians, especially [those] born in the 
Colony, about Indian History, and induce them to study Indian 
subjects. 
"(4) To ascertain the various grievances the Indians are 
labouring under, and to agitate by resorting to all constitutional 
methods for removing them. 
"(5) To enquire into the condition of the indentured Indians 
and to help them out of special hardships. 
1 The Natal Indian Congress leaders were said to have had a hand in 
intimidating an Indian witness from giving evidence in a trial for assault. 
The charge was actually against Padayachi, a member of the Natal Indian 
Congress, and it was stated that he did so at the instigation of leaders of the 
Congress. It was further alleged that under Gandhiji's leadership the Congress 
was conspiring to fight the Government, that it set up Indian labourers to 
agitate against their grievances, that Gandhiji extracted money from them and 
from Indian traders promising to help them obtain relief and used the funds 
for his own purposes. 
Vide also "Letter to Colonial Secretary", 21-10-1895. 
LETTER TO "THE NATAL ADVERTISER" 
257 
"(6) To help the poor and the needy in all reasonable ways. 
"(7) And generally to do everything that would tend to put 
the Indians on a better footing morally, socially, intellectually, and 
politically." 
The very constitution of the Congress prevented it from deal-
ing with private grievances, unless they have a public significance. 
To say that "it has been quite through accident that the 
existence of the 'Indian Congress' has been discovered" is hardly 
in accordance with known facts. 
While the Congress was yet in 
process of formation, The Natal Witness announced the fact, and, 
if I am not mistaken, the paragraph announcing it was copied by 
you. 
It is true that it has not been officially made known before. 
This was not done because its organizers were not, and are not 
yet, sure of its permanent existence. 
They thought it prudent to 
let time alone bring it to the public notice. 
No attempts have been 
made to keep it secret. 
On the other hand, its organizers even 
invited those Europeans who were considered to be sympathetic 
either to join it or attend its fortnightly meetings. 
It is only be-
cause it has begun to be misrepresented in private conversation, 
and has now been publicly misrepresented (no doubt, unconsciously) 
by you, that the above explanation has been deemed necessary. 
I am, etc., 
M. K. GANDHI 
HON. SEC., 
THE NATAL INDIAN CONGRESS 
PS. 
For your information I enclose copies of the rules, the list 
of members during its first year, and the first annual report. 
M. K. G. 
The Natal Advertiser, 25-9-1895 
I-17 
