76. LETTER TO "THE NATAL ADVERTISER" 
DURBAN, 
October 9, 1895 
TO 
THE EDITOR 
The Natal Advertiser 
SIR, 
No Indian can take exception to the general tenor of your 
leader in your yesterday's issue.1 
If the Congress has attempted, even in an indirect manner, 
to tamper with a witness, it will certainly deserve suppression. 
I will, for the present, content myself with repeating the statement 
that it has not made any such attempt. 
As the judgment in 
which the Congress has been condemned is under appeal, I do 
not feel free to deal with the evidence at length. 
The only witness 
who was asked questions about the Congress denied that it had 
anything to do with the matter. If the doings of men in their 
private capacity were to be fathered upon the association they 
may belong to, then I venture to think that almost any charge 
could be proved against any association. 
The Indians do not claim "one Indian one vote", nor is any 
vote claimed for the "Coolie" pure and simple. But then the 
"Coolie" pure and simple, so long as he remains one, cannot 
get it even under the existing law. 
The protest is only against 
colour or racial distinction. If the whole question were studied 
coolly there would be no occasion for any display of bad feeling 
or warmth by anybody. 
The Indians have in no part of the world attempted to gain 
political supremacy. 
In Mauritius, where they are in such large 
numbers, they are said to have shown no political ambition. And 
1 The paper had observed that if the Indian Congress could be proved 
to have resorted to "wrong and suspicious practices", then "swift and decisive 
action for its punishment would be justified". The judge in the Padayachi case 
had said that the Congress was "of the nature of an association of conspiracy, 
pernicious and fraught with danger to the whole community in this Colony 
of whatever race". Taking note of this adverse judgment, The Natal Advertiser 
had in an earlier issue observed that if that was really the case, the judge's 
censure "will not be regarded as a whit too severe". 
LETTER TO COLONIAL SECRETARY 
261 
they are not likely to do so in Natal, even though they may 
number 4,00,000 instead of 40,000. 
I am, etc., 
M. K. GANDHI 
The Natal Advertiser, 10-10-1895 
