77. 
LETTER TO COLONIAL SECRETARY1 
DURBAN, 
October 21, 1895 
TO 
THE HONOURABLE THE COLONIAL SECRETARY 
P. M. BURG 
SIR, 
Certain remarks in the newspapers2 and the judgment of the 
Durban Resident Magistrate in Regina v. 
Rungasamy Padayachi 
recently tried before him render it necessary for me to write to 
you, in my capacity as Honorary Secretary for the Congress, in 
connection with the remarks and the judgment referred to above. 
The judgment lays down that the Congress summoned an 
Indian named Asgara before it on a certain day in August and 
attempted to intimidate him from giving evidence in a case, and 
that it is an association of conspiracy, etc. 
I have to submit that not only has the Congress never sum-
moned the above-named person or any other person before it with 
a view to prevent him from giving evidence, but that the presid-
ing Magistrate had absolutely no grounds for making such remarks. 
The judgment in which the remarks occur is under appeal. 
That has prevented me from dealing with the matter at any 
length in the Press. 
Unfortunately, the remarks being merely 
obiter dicta of the Magistrate, may not be fully dealt with by the 
judges. During the examination, cross-examination and re-exami-
nation of the witness Asgara, the Congress was not even so much 
as mentioned. After the re-examination was finished, the Magistrate 
asked the witness questions about the Congress. 
It was made 
clear from the questions and answers that there was no meeting 
of the Congress during the week during which the intimidation is 
supposed to have taken place. 
Two printed circulars were pro-
1 This was Enclosure No. 1 in Despatch No. 128 of November 30, 1895, 
from the Governor of Natal to the Principal Secretary of State for the Colonies. 
2 Vide The Early Phase, pp. 485-7. 
262 
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI 
duced, one of which was dated the 14th August, the other the 
12th September, inviting members of the Congress to attend the 
meetings on the Tuesdays following the prospective dates, i.e., on 
the 20th August and 17th September. 
The intimidation was alleged to have happened on the 12th 
August. 
The witness is said to have been sent for by Mahomed 
Camroodeen to Moosa's office that day, where there were present 
M. C. Camroodeen, Dada Abdulla, Dowd Mahomed and two or 
three strangers. Here, it is alleged, he was asked certain questions 
about the case. 
And this the Magistrate has connected with the 
Congress, in spite of the witness's evidence to the effect that the 
Congress meetings are not held in Moosa's office, that there was 
no circular inviting him to the meeting at Moosa's office, that he 
did not attend the meetings convened in terms of the circulars, 
that the Congress meetings are held in the Congress Hall, that the 
circulars had nothing to do with the case, and that he was not 
present at the actual Congress meetings. 
The only point that could in any way be used to support 
the Magistrate's conclusion was the fact that three out of the six 
or seven men alleged to have been present at Moosa's office were 
members of the Congress. 
I beg to enclose herewith the extracts from the evidence bear-
ing on the matter. 
I venture to submit that, in some way or other, the Magis-
trate was biased. 
In the case of Poonoosamy Pather and three 
others, without a particle of evidence, he has remarked in his 
reasons for judgment that the defendants are members of and 
have been backed up by the Congress. 
As a matter of fact, all 
of them are not members of the Congress and the Congress had 
nothing whatever to do with the matter. As a great deal has been 
made of my instructing Mr. Millar in the Rungasamy case, I may 
mention that I had no connection whatever with the case of 
Poonoosamy and others, nor did I know, till after the case had 
far advanced towards the final stage, that there was such a case 
at all. My intervention was sought when Rungasamy was charged 
for the same offence for the second time and then, too, not in 
my capacity as Hon. Secretary of the Congress but as a lawyer. 
I beg to assure the Government that the intention of the 
organizers of the Congress is to make the Congress an institution 
useful to both the communities in the Colony and a medium of 
interpretation of the feelings of the Indians on questions affecting 
them, and thus to help the existing Government and not to 
embarrass it, if it could embarrass it at all. 
LETTER TO COLONIAL SECRETARY 
263 
Holding such views, they naturally resent any remarks made 
about the Congress that may curtail its usefulness. Nothing, there-
fore, will be more welcome to the members of the Congress than 
a thorough enquiry as to its constitution and working, should the 
Government be inclined to attach any weight to the Magistrate's 
remarks. 
I may state that the Congress has never yet interfered in 
any court matters between Indians and Indians and has refused 
to take up private grievances unless they have a public signi-
ficance. No individual member or members can do anything on 
behalf of, or in the name of, the Congress without the sanction of 
a majority of the members of the Congress assembled in accor-
dance with the rules of the Congress, which can only meet on a 
written notification from the Honorary Secretary. 
If the Government are satisfied that the Congress had nothing 
to do with the case in question, I, on behalf of the Congress, 
humbly beg to ask for some public notification of the fact; if, on 
the other hand, there be any doubt as to the matter I venture 
to ask for an enquiry. 
I beg to enclose herewith a copy each of Congress rules, 
the list of members for the year ending 22nd August, 1895, and 
the first Annual Report. 
I shall be very happy to supply any further information that 
may be required.1 
I have the honour to remain, 
Sir, 
Your obedient servant, 
M. K. GANDHI 
HON. SEC., N.I.C. 
Colonial Office Records No. 179, Vol. 192 
1 Soon after, the Supreme Court quashed the conviction in the case of 
Regina v. Poonoosamy Pather and others as it was based on untenable evidence. 
A month later, on November 27, 
the judgment in the Padayachi case also 
was set aside by the Supreme Court on the ground that there was "not a parti-
cle of evidence". 
Vide The Early Phase, p. 488. 
