78. 
MEMORIAL TO J.  CHAMBERLAIN1 
JOHANNESBURG, 
S.A.R. 
November 26, 1895 
TO 
THE RIGHT HONOURABLE JOSEPH CHAMBERLAIN, 
HER MAJESTY'S PRINCIPAL SECRETARY OF STATE 
FOR THE COLONIES, LONDON 
THE MEMORIAL OF THE UNDERSIGNED INDIAN BRITISH SUBJECTS 
RESIDING IN THE SOUTH AFRICAN REPUBLIC 
HUMBLY SHEWETH THAT: 
Your Memorialists, representing the Indian community in 
the South African 
Republic, hereby venture respectfully 
to 
approach Her Majesty's Government with regard to the resolution 
passed by the Honourable Volksraad of the South African Republic 
on 7th October, 1895, ratifying the treaty entered into between 
Her Majesty's Government and the Government of the South 
African Republic exempting all British subjects residing in the 
Republic from personal military service with the reservation that 
by "British subjects" shall be understood "White persons". 
Your Memorialists, on reading this resolution, ventured to 
telegraph to you on 22nd October, 1895, protesting against the 
distinction made between white and coloured British subjects.2 
The reservation is evidently aimed at the Indian British 
subjects residing in the South African Republic. 
Your Memorialists would draw your attention to the fact that 
the treaty itself does not qualify the words "British subjects" at 
all, and submit that the resolution, instead of accepting the treaty 
in toto, modifies it and on that ground alone your Memorialists 
1 This was an enclosure in Despatch No. 692 of December 10, 1895, from the 
High Commissioner to the South African Republic to the Principal Secretary 
of State for the Colonies. It was presented to the Home Government on May 
14, 1896; vide The Early Phase, p. 543. 
2 This telegram is not available. 
It stated that a Memorial would follow. 
The telegram was, however, acknowledged by H. O. Arnold Foster, M.P., who 
observed: ". . . I regard the action taken by Boers with regard to the British 
Indian subjects in the Transvaal, as not only gross indignity but likely if press-
ed in to raise very serious questions far outside the limits of the Boer State." 
Vide The Early Phase, p. 542. 
MEMORIAL TO J. 
CHAMBERLAIN 
265 
feel sure the modified ratification will not be accepted by Her 
Majesty's Government. 
Your Memorialists will not dwell upon the indignity to which 
the resolution unnecessarily subjects the Indians. 
The reason put forward for exemption of British subjects from 
commando was chiefly that, as the British subjects were not en-
titled to full Burgher rights and were subjected to disabilities in 
the Republic, they should not be compelled to render military 
service with the Burghers. It was openly avowed at the time the 
commotion was going on that the Uitlander population of the 
Republic would gladly serve in the Malaboch campaign1, if only 
they were treated as citizens and given the franchise. 
If, therefore, the European or, as the resolution puts it, 
"White" British subjects should be exempt because of the political 
disabilities they labour under, much more, it is respectfully 
submitted, should the Indian British subjects, who not only do not 
enjoy any political rights in the South African Republic but are 
treated as little more than chattels, of which fact the resolution is 
another indication. 
Your Memorialists, in conclusion, earnestly pray and con-
fidently hope, that in view of the general persecution that is in-
cessantly being meted out to the Indians throughout South Africa, 
whether in the Colonies or in the Independent States (even in 
the newly opened-up territories of Bulawayo and other parts), and 
in view of the magnitude of the already existing restrictions placed 
upon the Indians in South Africa generally and your Memorialists' 
and their fellow-brothers' attempts to get them removed by the 
intervention of Her Majesty's Government, this fresh attempt to 
yet further restrict the freedom of the Indians on the part of the 
Government of the South African Republic will not be countenanced 
by Her Majesty's Government. 
And for this act of justice and mercy, your Memorialists, as 
in duty bound, shall for ever pray, etc., etc.2 
M. C. KAMROODEEN 
ABDUL GANI 
MAHOMED ISMAIL 
ETC., ETC. 
Colonial Office Records No. 417, Vol. 152 
1 War by the Dutch against the Malaboch tribe in Northern Transvaal, 
in 1894 
2 The Memorial which came to be known as the Commando Memorial 
was forwarded to the Secretary of State for Colonies by Dadabhai Naoroji. On 
February 14, 1896, in reply to a question by Bhownaggree in the House of 
