79. 
THE INDIAN FRANCHISE1 
BEECH GROVE, DURBAN, 
December 16, 1895 
AN APPEAL TO EVERY BRITON IN SOUTH AFRICA 
The question of Indian franchise has convulsed the whole 
Colony, indeed the whole of South Africa, so far as the news-
papers are concerned. 
This appeal, therefore, needs no apology. 
It is an attempt to place before every Briton in South Africa, as 
shortly as possible, an Indian view of the Indian franchise. 
Some of the arguments in favour of the disfranchisement of 
the Indians are: 
(1) 
The Indians do not enjoy the franchise in India. 
(2) 
The Indian in South Africa represents the lowest-class 
Indian; in fact, he is the scum of India. 
(3) 
The Indian does not understand what the franchise is. 
(4) 
The Indian should not get the franchise because the 
Native, who is as much a British subject as the Indian, 
has none. 
(5) 
The Indians should be disfranchised in the interests of 
the Native population. 
(6) 
This Colony shall be and remain a white man's country, 
and not a black man's; and the Indian franchise will 
simply swamp the European vote, and give the Indian 
political supremacy. 
I shall take the objections seriatim. 
I 
It has been said over and over again that the Indian cannot 
and must not claim higher privileges than he enjoys in India, and 
that he has no franchise whatever in India. 
Now, the Indian in the first place does not claim any higher 
privileges than he enjoys in India. 
It should be borne in mind 
that the Government in India is not of the same type as here. 
Therefore, it is obvious there cannot be any analogy between the 
two. 
It might be said in answer to this that the Indians should 
——————————— 
Commons, Chamberlain observed that "steps have been taken to prevent the 
introduction of a colour distinction". 
1 Gandhiji sent copies of this pamphlet to Indian leaders like Lokamanya 
Tilak. 
THE INDIAN FRANCHISE 
267 
wait till they get the same kind of government 
in India. 
This answer, however, will not do. 
On the same principle, it 
can be argued that no man coming to Natal could get the fran-
chise unless he enjoyed the franchise in the country he came from 
in the same way and under the same circumstances, i.e., unless 
the Franchise Law of that country was the same as that of Natal. 
If such a doctrine were to be of universal application, it is easy 
to see that no one coming from England even could get the 
franchise in Natal, for the Franchise Law there is not the same as 
in Natal; much less could a man coming from Germany or Russia, 
where a more or less autocratic Government prevails. 
The only 
and real test, therefore, is not whether the Indians have the fran-
chise in India, but whether they understand the principle of re-
presentative government. 
But they have the franchise in India, extremely limited it is 
true; nevertheless it is there. 
The Legislative Councils recognize 
the ability of the Indian to understand and appreciate represen-
tative government. 
They are a standing testimony to the Indian's 
fitness for representative institutions. 
Members of Indian Legis-
lative Councils are partly elected and partly nominated. 
The 
position of the Legislative Councils in India is not very unlike 
that of the late Legislative Council of Natal. 
And the Indians 
are not debarred from entering those Councils. They compete on 
the same terms with the Europeans. 
At the last election of Members for the Legislative Council 
of Bombay, the candidates for one of the constituencies were a 
European and an Indian. 
There are Indian Members in all the Legislative Councils of 
India. 
Indians vote at these elections as well as the Europeans. 
The franchise is certainly limited. It is also circuitous, as for 
example: the Corporation of Bombay elects one Member to the 
Legislative Council, and the Corporation consists of Members 
elected by the ratepayers, mostly Indian. 
There are thousands of Indian voters for municipal elections 
in Bombay from which class, or a class similar to which, are 
drawn most of the Indian traders in the Colony. 
Furthermore, posts of the utmost importance are thrown open 
to the Indians. Does that show as if they were considered unfit to 
understand representative government? 
An Indian has been a 
Chief Justice—an office that carries with it a salary of 60,000 rupees 
or £6,000 per year. Only recently an Indian, belonging to the 
class which most of the traders belong to here, has been appointed 
Puisne Judge in the High Court of Judicature at Bombay. 
268 
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI 
A Tamil gentleman, to whose caste belong some of the in-
dentured Indians, is a Puisne Judge of the High Court at Madras. 
An Indian has been entrusted with the very responsible duties of 
a Civil Commissioner in Bengal. 
Indians have occupied the Vice-Chancellor's chair at Calcutta 
and Bombay. 
Indians compete for the Civil Service on the same terms as 
the Europeans. 
The present President of the Bombay Corporation is an Indian 
elected by the Members of the Corporation. 
The latest testimony to the Indian's fitness for an equality 
with the civilized races comes from the London Times of 23rd 
August, 1895. 
The writer of "Indian Affairs" in The Times who, it is well 
known, is no other than Sir William Wilson Hunter, perhaps the 
most eminent Indian historian, says: 
Of the acts of daring and of the even more splendid examples of 
endurance by which those honours were won, it is difficult to read without 
a thrill of admiration. 
One Sepoy who received the Order of Merit has 
had no fewer than thirty-one wounds, "probably," says the Indian Daily 
News, "a record number". Another, shot in the defile where Ross's party 
was cut up, quietly felt out the bullet in his body and with both hands 
forced it, fearless of the agony, to the surface. When at last he could get 
it between his fingers he pulled it out, and then, streaming with blood, he 
shouldered his rifle again and did a march of twenty-one miles. 
But if the gallantry of the native soldiers who obtained recognition 
stirs within us a pride in having such fellow-subjects, the paltry rewards 
doled forth in cases of equal pluck and steadfastness awaken very different 
feelings. 
Two water carriers of the 4th Bengal Infantry were singled out 
in the dispatches 'for the gallantry and devotion exhibited by them during 
the action at Koragh'. Indeed, nothing could exceed their magnificent 
self-devotion to their comrades in that deadly pass. 
Another man of the 
same regiment was mentioned for 'the conspicuous gallantry and devotion 
exhibited' while with the party which brought the late Captain Baird into 
Chitral fort .... The truth is that the Indians are earning the right to 
be regarded as worthy fellow-subjects in more ways than one. 
The battle-
field has always formed the short cut to an honourable equality among 
races. 
But the Indians are also proving their title to our respect by the 
slower and more difficult methods of civil life. 
There never was a greater 
experiment made in the constitutional government of dependencies than the expan-
sion of the Indian Legislative Councils on a partially elective basis three years 
ago (the italics are mine). Nor in any part of India did the issue of 
that experiment seem more doubtful than in Bengal. 
The Lieutenant-
THE INDIAN FRANCHISE 
269 
Governorship of Bengal contains a population numerically equal to that 
of the Madras and Bombay Presidencies put together, and from an admi-
nistrative point of view much more difficult to manage. 
Sir Charles Elliott bears generous testimony not only to the ab-
sence of factious opposition but to the valuable practical aid which he has 
obtained in maturing this necessarily complex measure (The Bengal Sani-
tary Drainage Act) from his 
Legislature as expanded by Lord Salisbury's 
Statute. 
Many of the discussions have been most helpful, and so far as 
Bengal is concerned—the province in which the elective system seemed 
fraught with the greatest difficulty—the experiment, after a severe trial, has 
proved a success (the italics are again mine). 
II 
The second objection is that the Indian in South Africa 
represents the lowest-class Indian. The statement is hardly correct. 
It will not, of course, be true as regards the trading community, 
nor will it be so as to all the indentured Indians, some of whom 
belong to the highest castes in India. They are certainly all very 
poor. 
Some of them were vagabonds in India. 
Many also be-
long to the lowest class. 
But I may be permitted to say without 
giving any offence that, if the Indian community in Natal is not, 
nor is the European community here, drawn from the highest 
class. 
But I venture to submit that undue importance is given to 
this fact. If the Indian is not a model Indian, it is the duty of 
the Government to help him to become one. 
And if the reader 
wishes to know what a model Indian is, I beg to refer him to 
my "Open Letter" where many authorities are collected to show 
that he is as much civilized as a "model" European. 
And just 
as it is competent for a lowest-class European to rise to the highest 
level in Europe, so is it for the lowest-class Indian in India. By 
persistent indifference, or retrogressive legislation, the Indian would 
be degraded lower still in the Colony, and thus may constitute 
a real danger which he was not before. 
Shunned, despised, cursed, 
he will only do and be what others in similar positions have done 
and been. 
Loved and well treated, he is capable of rising higher 
like any member of every other nationality. 
He cannot be said 
to be well treated so long as he is not even given those privileges 
which he enjoys or would enjoy in India under similar circum-
stances. 
III 
To say that the Indian does not understand the franchise is to 
ignore the whole history of India. Representation, in the truest sense 
270 
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI 
of the term, the Indian has understood and appreciated from the 
earliest ages. That principle—the Panchayat —guides all the actions 
of an Indian. He considers himself a member of the Panchayat, which 
really is the whole body civic to which he belongs for the time 
being. That power to do so—that power to understand thorough-
ly the principle of popular government—has rendered him the 
most harmless and most docile man on earth. Centuries of foreign 
rule and oppression have failed to make him a dangerous member 
of society. 
Wherever he goes, and under whatever conditions he 
is placed, he bows to the decision of the majority represented 
by those in authority over him. 
For, he knows no one can be 
in authority over him, unless he is tolerated there by a majority 
of the body to which he belongs. 
This principle is so ingrained 
in the Indian heart that even the most despotic princes of the 
Indian States feel that they are to rule for the people. 
It is true 
that they do not all act up to that principle. The causes need 
not be discussed here. 
And the most astounding fact is that, even 
when nominally there is a monarchical government, the Panchayat 
is the supreme body. 
The actions of its members are regulated 
in accordance with the wish of the majority. 
For authorities to 
support my contention I must beg leave to refer the reader to 
the Franchise petition1 to the Honourable the Legislative Assembly. 
IV 
"The Indian should not get the franchise because the Native, 
who is as much a British subject as the Indian, has none." 
I have stated this objection as I find it in the papers. 
It is 
at variance with the fact that the Indian already enjoys the 
franchise in Natal. 
An attempt is now being made to disfran-
chise him. 
Without entering into comparisons, I would beg to state what 
are hard facts. 
The Native franchise is governed by a special 
law which has been in force for some years. 
That law does not 
apply to the Indian. 
It has not been contended that it should 
apply to the Indian. 
The franchise (whatever it may be) of the 
Indian in India is not governed by a special law. 
It applies to 
all alike. 
The Indian has his Charter of Liberty, the Proclamation 
of 1858. 
V 
The latest argument advanced in favour of disfranchisement 
is that the Indian franchise would do harm to the Native popu-
1 Vide "Petition to Natal Legislative Assembly", 28-6-1894. 
THE INDIAN FRANCHISE 
271 
lation of the Colony. In what way this will happen is not stated 
at all. But, I presume, the objectors to the Indian franchise rely 
upon the stock objection to the Indian on the alleged ground that 
he supplies liquor to the Natives and this spoils them. 
Now I 
venture to submit that the Indian franchise cannot make any 
difference one way or the other. If the Indians supply liquor they 
would not do so to any greater extent because of their vote. 
The 
Indian vote can never become sufficiently strong to affect the Native 
policy of the Colony, which is not only jealously watched but to 
a very great extent controlled by the Downing Street authorities. 
In fact, even the European Colonists are powerless against Down-
ing Street in this matter. But let us, for a moment, look at facts. 
The analytical table referred to below, showing the position of the 
Indian voters already on the List, shows that by far the largest 
number of them are traders who, it is well known, are not only 
teetotallers themselves, but would like to see liquor banished al-
together from the land, and if the Voters' List continues to re-
main so, the effect of that vote, if any, on the Native policy 
will be for the better. 
But the following extracts from the Indian 
Immigration Commission, 1885-87, show that the Indians are 
not worse than the Europeans in this respect. 
In quoting them I 
disclaim any intention to make comparisons, which I have tried 
to avoid as much as possible. 
Nor do I wish thereby to excuse 
my countrymen. 
No one can regret more than myself to see 
any Indian found drunk or supplying liquor to Natives. I beg to 
assure the reader that my only wish is to show that the objection 
to the Indian vote on that particular ground is merely superficial 
and does not bear scrutiny. 
The Commissioners, who were specially commissioned, among 
other things, to report upon the charge against the Indians of 
drunkenness and crimes resulting therefrom, at pp. 42 & 43, 
report thus: 
We have examined many witnesses on this subject. 
Their evidence 
and such criminal statistics as are forthcoming fail to convince us that 
drunkenness and crime resulting therefrom are prevalent amongst Indian 
immigrants in a greater ratio than amongst other sections of the com-
munity, against whom no such restrictive legislation is proposed. 
We do not doubt that there is much truth in the averment that 
Natives readily obtain ardent liquors through the agency of Indians .... 
We, however, doubt that they are more guilty in this matter than the 
white people who traffic in liquor. 
It has been shrewdly observed that the people who make the loudest 
complaints against the Indian immigrants for selling or disposing of liquor 
272 
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI 
to the Natives are the very persons who themselves sell the liquor to the 
Native. Their trade is interfered with and their profits are lessened by 
the competition of Indian liquor traffickers. 
What follows the above is instructive reading as showing that, 
in the opinion of the Commissioners, the Indians in India are 
free from the habit of drinking and that they learn it here. 
The 
question how and why they take to liquor in Natal I leave to 
the reader to answer. 
The Commissioners at page 83 say as follows: 
Although we are convinced that Indians, and especially free Indians 
in Natal, surrender themselves to the drinking of intoxicating liquor to a 
greater extent than in their own country, yet we are constrained to re-
cord that there is no satisfactory proof before us that the percentage of 
drunk and disorderly persons is greater amongst them than amongst other 
races dwelling within the Colony. 
Superintendent Alexander says in his evidence before the 
Commission (p. 146): 
The Indians are to be considered a necessary evil at present; we can-
not do without them as labourers; we cannot do without them as store-
keepers; they are as good as the Natives; they have very much improved, 
but the Natives have gone down very much; nearly all the thefts are now 
committed by Natives; as far as my experience goes, the Natives obtain 
drink from Indians and from everyone else who will supply them; I find 
some white people as bad as Indians in this way; these are men out of 
employ, vagrants, who, to gain a sixpence, will supply a Native with a 
bottle of liquor. 
In the present condition of Natal I do not think it is possible to 
substitute a white for an Indian population. 
I do not think we can. 
I can deal with 3,000 Indians with the staff that I have, but if there were 
3,000 corresponding white British workmen, I could not. . . . 
At page 149 he says: 
I find that people generally suspect Coolies of doing everything wrong, 
stealing fowls, etc., but I find such is not the case. 
Out of the last nine 
cases of fowl-stealing, all of which were laid to my corporation night-soil 
Coolies, I find that two Natives and three white men have been convicted 
of stealing these fowls. 
I would further draw the attention of the readers to the 
recently issued Native Blue-book, and there they will find that 
almost all the Magistrates are of the opinion that European in-
fluences have brought about a change for the worse in the moral 
character of the Natives. 
THE INDIAN FRANCHISE 
273 
In the face of these incontrovertible facts, is it not rather 
unfair to impute the blame to the Indians entirely for the Native 
deterioration? 
In 1893, while there were 28 convictions against 
Europeans in the Borough for supplying liquor, there were only 3 
against Indians. 
VI 
"This country shall be and remain a white man's country 
and not a black man's, and the Indian franchise will simply 
swamp the European vote and give the Indian political supre-
macy in Natal." 
With the first part of the statement I do not propose to deal. 
I confess that I do not even understand it fully. 
I would, how-
ever, try to remove the misconception that underlies the latter 
part of the statement. I venture to say that the Indian vote can 
never swamp the European vote, and that the idea of the Indian 
trying to claim political supremacy is contrary to all past experi-
ence. 
I have had the honour to talk to many Europeans with 
reference to this question, and almost all have argued upon the 
assumption that there is "one man one vote" in the Colony. 
That there is a property qualification was an information to them. 
I must, therefore, be pardoned for reproducing here the Section 
of the Franchise Law dealing with the qualification: 
Every man, except as hereafter excepted, above the age of twenty-
one years, who possesses an immovable property to the value of £50 or 
who rents any such property of the yearly value of £10 within any elec-
toral district and who is duly registered in the manner hereinafter men-
tioned, shall be entitled to vote at the election of a member for such 
district. 
When any such property as aforesaid is occupied by more per-
sons than one as proprietors or renters, each of such occupants, being duly 
registered, shall be entitled to vote in respect of such property, provided 
the value or, as the case may be, the rent thereof be such as would entitle 
each of such joint occupants to vote if equally divided among them. 
From this it is clear that it is not every Indian who can 
get the franchise. 
And how many Indians are there in the 
Colony, compared with the Europeans, who have immovable pro-
perty of the value of £50 or who rent such property of the yearly 
value of £10? This law has been in force for a long time, and 
the following table will give some idea of the relative strength of 
the European and the Indian franchise. I have compiled the table 
from the latest lists published in the Gazette: 
I-18 
274 
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA 
GANDHI 
VOTERS 
NO. 
ELECTORAL DIVISIONS 
EUROPEANS 
INDIANS 
1 Pietermaritzburg 
. . 
. . 
1,521 
82 
2 Umgeni 
. . 
. . 
. . 
306 
Nil 
3 Lion's River 
. . 
. . 
511 
Nil 
4 
Ixopo 
. . 
. . 
. . 
573 
3 
5 Durban 
. . 
. . 
. . 
2,100 
143 
6 
County of Durban 
. . 
. . 
779 
20 
7 Victoria 
. . 
. . 
. . 
566 
1 
8 
Umvoti 
. . 
. . 
. . 
438 
1 
9 
Weenen 
. . 
. . 
. . 
528 
Nil 
10 Klip River 
. . 
. . 
591 
1 
11 
Newcastle 
. . 
. . 
. . 
917 
Nil 
12 
Alexandra 
. . 
. . 
201 
" 
13 
Alfred 
. . 
. . 
. . 
278 
" 
———— 
———— 
9,309 
251 
———— 
Grand Total 
9,560 
———— 
Thus, out of 9,560 registered voters only 251 are Indians. 
And only two divisions have Indian voters worth mentioning. 
The proportion of Indian voters to the European, roughly speak-
ing, is 1 :38, i.e., the European vote at present is 38 times as 
strong as the Indian vote. 
According to the Report of the Protector 
of Indian Immigrants for 1895, out of the total Indian population 
of 46,343 only 30,303 are free Indians. Adding to this the trad-
ing Indian population of, say, 5,000, we have, roughly, 35,000 
freed and free Indians. 
At present, therefore, the Indian popu-
lation that may compete with the European population as to 
voting is not so large as the European. But I believe I am not 
wide of the mark in saying that more than half of the 35,000 
are only a stage higher than the indentured Indians in point of 
pecuniary circumstances. 
I have been travelling in the districts 
surrounding and within 50 miles of Durban, and I may safely 
venture to assert that most of the Indians who are free are living 
from hand to mouth and certainly have not immovable property 
worth £50. 
Free Indian adults in the Colony number only 
12,360. Thus, I submit that the fears as to the Indian vote 
swamping the European in the near future are entirely ground-
less. 
The following analysis of the Indian Voters' List further shows 
that most of the Indian voters are those Indians who have settled 
THE INDIAN FRANCHISE 
275 
in the Colony for a very long time; that out of 205 whom I have 
been able to get identified, only 35 have been at one time in-
dentured Indians, and that they have all been in the Colony for 
over 15 years. 
TABLE SHOWING THE LENGTH OF RESIDENCE OF THE INDIAN 
VOTERS AND THE NUMBER OF INDIAN VOTERS WHO HAVE ONCE 
BEEN UNDER INDENTURE: 
4 years' residence 
. . 
. . 
. . 
13 
5 to 
9 
" 
. . 
. . 
. . 
. . 
50 
10 to 13 
" 
. . 
. . 
. . 
. . 
35 
14 to 15 
" 
. . 
. . 
. . 
. . 
59 
Free Indians who have once been under indenture, but 
who have been in the Colony over 15, and in many 
cases over 20 years 
. . 
. . 
. . 
. . 
35 
Colonial-born 
. . 
. . 
. . 
. . 
. . 
9 
Interpreters 
. . 
. . 
. . 
. . 
. . 
4 
Not classified 
. . 
. . 
. . 
. . 
. . 
46 
——— 
251 
——— 
Of course, this table cannot by any means be said to be 
absolutely correct. 
I think, however, it is accurate enough for 
the present purpose. Thus, so far as these figures go, the Indians 
who come under indenture take 15 years or more to be able to 
have sufficient property qualifications to get on the Voters' Roll. 
And if the freed Indian population were excepted, no one can say 
that the trading population alone can ever swamp the Voters' 
Roll. 
Moreover, most of these 35 freed Indians have risen to 
the status of traders. Of those who have originally come on their 
own means, a large majority have taken a long time to be able 
to get on the Voters' Roll. 
Of the 46 whom I have not been 
able to get identified, a great many, by their names, appear to 
belong to the trading class. There are many Colonial-born Indians 
in the Colony. 
They are also educated, and yet on the Voters' 
Roll there are only 9. 
This would show that they are too poor 
to have the sufficient qualifications. 
On the whole, therefore, it 
would seem that taking the present List as a basis, the fears as 
to the Indian vote assuming threatening proportions are imaginary. 
Of the 205, over 40 are either dead or have left the Colony. 
The following table is 
an analysis of the Indian Voters' 
List according to their occupation: 
276 
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI 
TRADING CLASS 
Storekeepers 
. . 
. . 
. . 
. . 
92 
Merchants 
. . 
. . 
. . 
. . 
32 
Goldsmiths 
. . 
. . 
. . 
. . 
4 
Jewellers 
. . 
. . 
. . 
. . 
3 
Confectioner 
. . 
. . 
. . 
. . 
1 
Fruiterers 
. . 
. . 
. . 
. . 
4 
Tradesmen 
. . 
. . 
. . 
. . 
11 
Tinsmith 
. . 
. . 
. . 
. . 
1 
Tobacco Merchants 
. . 
. . 
. . 
2 
Eating-house Keeper 
. . 
. . 
. . 
1 
———
151 
———
CLERKS AND ASSISTANTS 
Clerks 
. . 
. . 
. . 
. . 
21 
Accountants 
. . 
. . 
. . 
. . 
6 
Book-keeper 
. . 
. . 
. . 
. . 
1 
Salesmen 
. . 
. . 
. . 
. . 
6 
Schoolmaster 
. . 
. . 
. . 
. . 
1 
Photographer 
. . 
. . 
. . 
. . 
1 
Interpreters 
. . 
. . 
. . 
. . 
4 
Storemen 
. . 
. . 
. . 
. . 
5 
Barbers 
. . 
. . 
. . 
. . 
2 
Barman 
. . 
. . 
. . 
. . 
1 
Managers 
. . 
. . 
. . 
. . 
2 
———
50 
———
GARDENERS AND OTHERS 
Vegetable Dealer 
. . 
. . 
. . 
1 
Farmers 
. . 
4 
. . 
. . 
. . 
Domestic Servants 
5 
. . 
. . 
. . 
Fisherman 
1 
. . 
. . 
. . 
. . 
Gardeners 
. . 
. . 
. . 
. . 
26 
Lamp-lighters 
. . 
. . 
. . 
. . 
3 
Cart Drivers 
. . 
. . 
. . 
. . 
2 
Constables 
. . 
. . 
. . 
. . 
2 
Labourers 
. . 
. . 
. . 
. . 
2 
THE INDIAN FRANCHISE 
277 
Waiter 
. . 
. . 
. . 
. . 
1 
Cooks 
. . 
. . 
. . 
. . 
3  
—————— 
50  
——————  
251 
———————— 
This analysis also ought, I think, to assist unbiased men in 
removing their fears as to the Voters' List being swamped by 
undeserving or lowest-class Indians. 
For, by far the greatest 
number belongs to the trading or the so-called "Arab" class who, 
at any rate, are acknowledged to be not quite unfit to vote. 
Those classified under the second heading either belong to 
the trader class or to that class of Indians who have received a 
tolerably good English education. 
Those belonging to the third division may be termed labourers 
of a higher order—far above the average indentured Indian. 
They are those who have settled in the Colony for over 20 years 
with their families and either own property or pay good rents. 
I may say also that, if my information be correct, most of these 
voters can read and write their own mother tongue. 
Thus, if 
the present Indian Voters' List is to serve as a guide for the future 
and assuming that the franchise qualification remains as it is, the 
List is very satisfactory from a European standpoint. First, because 
numerically the voting strength of the Indians is very poor, and 
secondly, because most (more than ¾) of the Indian voters be-
long to the trading class. 
It should also be borne in mind that 
the number of the trading Indians in the Colony will remain 
almost the same for a long time. 
For, while many come every 
month, an equal number leaves for India. As a rule, the incoming 
ones take the place of the outgoing ones. 
So far I have not imported the natural proclivities of the two 
communities into the argument at all but have merely dealt with 
the figures. 
Yet, the natural proclivities will have not a little 
to do with the political activity of the two. 
There cannot be 
two opinions about the fact that the Indians, as a rule, do not 
actively meddle with politics. 
They have never tried to usurp 
political power anywhere. 
Their religion (no matter whether it 
be Mahomedan or Hindu, the teaching of ages cannot be obli-
terated by a mere change of name) teaches them indifference to 
material pursuits. 
Naturally they are satisfied so long as they 
can earn a respectable living. I take the liberty to say that, had 
not an attempt been made to tread upon their commercial pursuits, 
had not attempts been made and repeated to degrade them to the 
condition of pariahs of society, had not, in fact, an attempt been 
278 
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI 
made to keep them for ever "hewers of wood and drawers of 
water", i.e., in a state of indenture or in one very much resem-
bling it, there would have been no franchise agitation. I would 
go further. 
I have no hesitation in saying that even now there 
is no political agitation in the real sense of the term. 
But an 
attempt is, most unfortunately, being made by the Press to father, 
as it were, such an agitation upon the Indians. 
Leave them to 
follow their legitimate pursuits, do not attempt to degrade them, 
treat them with ordinary kindness and there would be no franchise 
question, simply because they would not even take the trouble to 
have their names on the Voters' Roll. 
But it has been said, and that too by responsible persons, 
that a few Indians want political power and that these few are 
Mahomedan agitators and that the Hindus should learn from 
past experience that the Mahomedan rule will be ruinous for them. 
The first statement is without foundation and the last statement is 
most unfortunate and painful. 
To gain political power is entirely 
impossible, if gaining political power means entrance into the 
Legislative Assembly. 
Such a statement presupposes the presence 
in the Colony of very wealthy Indians having a competent know-
ledge of the English language. 
Now, there are very few wealthy, 
as distinguished from well-to-do, Indians in the Colony and there 
is perhaps none capable of discharging the duties of a legislator, 
not because there is none capable of understanding politics, but 
because there is none possessing such a knowledge of the English 
language as would be expected of a legislator. 
The second statement is an attempt to set the Hindus against 
the Mahomedans in the Colony. 
How any responsible man in 
the Colony can wish for such a calamity is very wonderful. 
Such 
attempts have been attended by the most grievous results in India 
and have even threatened the permanence of British rule. 
To 
make them in this Colony where the two sects are living most 
amicably is, I venture to say, most mischievous. 
It is a healthy sign that it is now recognized that to debar 
all Indians from the franchise would be a grievous injustice. 
Some think that the so-called Arabs should be allowed the fran-
chise, some think there should be a selection made among them, 
and some think that the indentured Indians should never be able 
to get the franchise. 
The latest suggestion comes from Stanger, 
and is most humorous. If that suggestion were to be followed, 
those alone who could prove that they were voters in India would 
be entitled to it in Natal. Why such a rule for the poor Indians 
alone? 
I do not think they would object to such an arrangement 
THE INDIAN FRANCHISE 
279 
if it were applicable to all. And I should not be surprised if the 
Europeans also were to find it difficult to get their names on the 
Voters' List in the Colony under such conditions. For how many 
Europeans are there in the Colony who were on the Voters' List 
in the States they have come from? If, however, the statement were 
made with regard to the Europeans, it would be received with the 
strongest indignation. 
It has been received seriously with regard 
to the Indians. 
It has also been stated that the Indians agitate for "one 
Indian one vote". 
I submit that the statement is without the 
slightest foundation, and is calculated to create unnecessary pre-
judice against the Indian community. 
I believe that the present 
property qualification is sufficient, at any rate for the present if 
not for all time, to maintain the superior numerical strength of 
the European vote. 
If, however, the European Colonists think 
otherwise, no Indian, I think, will take exception to a reasonable 
and real educational qualification and a larger property qualifica-
tion than at present. 
What the Indians do and would protest 
against is colour distinction—disqualification based on account 
of racial difference. The Indian subjects of Her Majesty have been 
most solemnly assured over and over again that no qualifications 
or restrictions will be placed upon them because of their nationality 
or religion. 
And this assurance was given and has been repeated 
upon no sentimental grounds but on proof of merit. The first 
note was struck after it was ascertained beyond doubt that the 
Indians could be safely treated on a footing of equality, that they 
were most loyal to the throne and law-abiding, and that the 
British hold of India could be permanently maintained only upon 
those terms and no other. That there have been serious depar-
tures from the above assurance could, I submit, be no answer to 
the solid fact of its existence. I think those departures would be 
exceptions to prove the rule, they would not override it. 
For, 
if I had time and space at my disposal, and if I were not afraid 
of tiring the readers' patience, I could quote innumerable instances 
in which the Proclamation of 1858 has been strictly acted upon, 
and is even at the present moment being acted upon in India and 
elsewhere. 
And, surely, this is not the occasion for a departure 
from it. I submit, therefore, that the Indians are perfectly justified 
in protesting against racial disqualifications and expecting that 
their protest will be respected. 
Having said so much, I venture 
to say on behalf of my fellow-brothers that they would not think 
of objecting to any measure, with regard to the franchise, which 
may be devised in order to keep the Voters' Roll clear of objec-
280 
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI 
tionable men, or to provide against preponderance of the Indian 
vote in future. 
I am confident that the Indians have no wish to 
see ignorant Indians who cannot possibly be expected to under-
stand the value of a vote being placed on the Voters' List. 
They 
submit that all are not such, and that such are to be found, 
more or less, in all communities. 
The object of every right-minded 
Indian is to fall in with the wishes of the European Colonists as 
far as possible. 
They would rather forgo a crumb from the loaf 
than have the whole in opposition to the European Colonists and 
from England. The object of this appeal is to beseech the legis-
lators and the European Colonists to devise or countenance only 
such a measure, if one is necessary, that would be acceptable 
also to those affected by it. 
To make the position clearer, I 
would take the liberty to show by extracts from a Blue-book 
what the most eminent Colonists have thought about the question. 
Mr. Saunders, a member of the late Honourable Legislative 
Council, could go only thus far: 
The mere definition that these signatures must be in full and in 
the elector's own handwriting and written in European characters would 
go a long way to check the extreme risk of the Asiatic mind swamping 
the English (Affairs of Natal, C. 3796-1883). 
At page 7 of the same book Captain Graves, the late Protector 
of Immigrants, says: 
I am of opinion that only those Indians who have abandoned all 
claim for themselves and their families to a free return passage to India 
are justly entitled to the franchise. 
It should be noticed that Captain Graves spoke of the Indians 
recognized by his department, i.e., the indentured Indians. 
The then Attorney-General and present Chief Justice says: 
It will be noticed that the measure drafted by me contains clauses 
which have been adopted from the recommendations of the Select Com-
mittee providing for the carrying out of the alternative plan mentioned in 
Mr. Saunders's letter, while the proposal for the special disqualification of 
aliens has not been considered advisable of adoption. 
At page 14 of the same book he says again: 
As regards the proposal to exclude from the exercise of the fran-
chise all persons of every nationality or race which is not in every respect 
under the common law of the Colony, this is a provision evidently aimed 
at the electoral rights at present enjoyed by the Indian and Creole popu-
lation of this Colony. As I have already stated in my report, Serial No. 
12, I cannot recognize the justice or expediency of such a measure. 
THE INDIAN FRANCHISE 
281 
The Blue-book in question contains much interesting reading 
on the franchise question and shows clearly that the idea of 
special disqualification was repugnant to the Colonists at the 
time. 
The reports of the various meetings held in connection with 
the franchise show that the speakers have invariably argued that 
the Indians shall not be allowed to occupy this country which 
has been won by European blood and which has been made what 
it is by European hands, and show that the Indians are treated 
as intruders in the Colony. 
As to the first statement, I can only 
say that, if the Indians are to be denied any privileges because they 
have not shed their blood for this land, the Europeans belonging 
to other States in Europe should not receive the same privileges. 
It could also be argued that the immigrants from England also 
have no business to trespass upon the special preserve of the first 
white settlers. And surely, if the shedding of blood is any crite-
rion of merit, and if British Colonists consider the other British 
dominions as portions of the British Empire, the Indians have 
shed their blood for Britain on many an occasion. 
The Chitral 
campaign is the most recent instance. 
As to the Colony having been made by European hands and 
the Indian being an intruder, I beg to submit that all the facts 
show quite the opposite. 
Without any comments of my own I shall now venture to 
quote extracts from the Report of the Indian Immigrants Commission 
referred to above, for a loan of which I am indebted to the 
Protector of Immigrants. 
Says Mr. Saunders, one of the Commissioners, at page 98: 
Indian immigration brought prosperity, prices rose, people were no 
longer content to grow or sell produce for a song, they could do better; 
war, high prices for wool, sugar, etc., kept up prosperity and prices of 
local produce in which the Indians dealt. 
On page 99 he says: 
I return to the consideration of the question as one of broad public 
interest. 
One thing is certain—white men will not settle in Natal or 
any other part of South Africa to become mere hewers of wood and draw-
ers of water; rather than that they will leave us either for the vast interior 
or by sea. 
While this is a fact, our records prove, as do those of other 
Colonies, that the introduction of coloured labour which develops and 
draws out the hidden capabilities of the soil and its unoccupied acres opens 
out at the same time numerous unforeseen fields for the profitable employ-
ment of white settlers. 
282 
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA 
GANDHI 
Nothing more clearly proves this than our own experience. If we 
look to 1859, we shall find that the assured promise of Indian labour resul-
ted in an immediate rise of revenue which increased fourfold within a few 
years. 
Mechanics who could not get work and were earning 5/- a day, 
and less, found their wages more than doubled, and progress gave en-
couragement to everyone from the Burg to the Sea. 
But a few years later, 
alarm (a well-founded alarm) arose, that it1 would be suspended (the 
records are there to correct me if I am wrong) simultaneously, down went 
the revenue and wages, immigration was checked, confidence vanished 
and retrenchment and reductions of salaries was the main thing thought 
of; and yet another change, some years later in 1873 (long after the dis-
covery of diamonds in 1868), a fresh promise of renewed Indian immigra-
tion created its effect, and up again went the revenue, wages and salaries, 
and retrenchment was soon spoken of as a thing of the past (would that 
this was so now). 
Records like these ought to tell their own tale and silence childish 
race sentimentalities and mean jealousies. 
In further and collateral corroboration of the effect of introduction 
of coloured labour on the welfare of white settlers let me refer to a speech 
made by the Duke of Manchester who has so identified himself with 
colonial interests. 
He had just returned from Queensland and told his 
hearers that the result of an agitation there, hostile to the introduction of 
coloured labour, had proved most disastrous to those very white settlers who 
had hoped by checking the supply of imported coloured labourers to destroy 
competition which they wrongly imagined deprived the white settlers 
of work. 
At page 100 the same gentleman continues: 
So far as concerns free Indian traders, their competition and the 
consequent lowering of the prices of articles of consumption by which 
the public benefits (and yet strange to say, of which it complains) it is 
clearly shown that these Indian shops have been and are most exclusive-
ly supported by the larger firms of white merchants who thus practically 
employ these men to dispose of their goods. 
Stop Indian immigration if you will; if there are not enough un-
occupied houses now, empty more by clearing out Arabs or Indians, 
who add to the productive and consuming power of a less than half-peopled 
country, but let us trace results in this one branch of the enquiry taking 
it as an example of others, trace out how untenanted houses depreciate the 
value of property and securities, how after this must result stagnation in the 
building trade, and those other trades and stores for supplies dependent 
on it. 
Follow out how this leads to a reduced demand for white me-
1 Indian labour recruitment 
THE INDIAN FRANCHISE 
283 
chanics, and with the reduction in spending power of so many, how fall 
of revenue is to be expected next, need of retrenchment or taxation, or 
both. Let this result and others, far too numerous to be calculated on in 
detail, be faced, and if blind race sentimentalism or jealousy is to prevail, 
so be it. 
Mr. Henry Binns gave his evidence to the following effect 
before the Commission (page 156): 
In my opinion the free Indian population is a most useful section of 
the community. A large portion of them, considerably larger than is gene-
rally supposed, are in service in the Colony, particularly employed as 
house servants in the towns and villages. 
They are also considerable pro-
ducers, and from information which I have taken some trouble to gather, 
I conclude that the free Indians have grown about 100,000 maunds maize 
per annum for the last two or three years, besides considerable quantities 
of tobacco and other articles. 
Before there was a free Indian population, 
the towns of Pietermaritzburg and Durban had no supply of fruit, vege-
tables and fish; at present all these things are fully supplied. 
We have never had any immigrants from Europe who have shown any 
inclination to become market gardeners and fishermen, and I am of 
opinion that but for the free Indian population the markets of Maritzburg 
and Durban would be as badly supplied now as they were years ago . 
. . . Were Coolie immigration to be permanently stopped, the rate 
of wages payable to European mechanics would probably not be affected 
one way or the other, but in a very short time after such stoppage there 
would cease to be as much employment for them as there is now. 
Tropical cultivation never has been, and never will be, carried on with-
out Indian labourers. 
The then Attorney-General and present Chief Justice thus gave 
his evidence before the Commission (page 327): 
. . . In my opinion numbers of the Indians who have been intro-
duced have in a great measure provided on the Coast for the failure of 
white immigrants, and have cultivated lands which would otherwise re-
main uncultivated, with crops which are of real advantage to the inhabi-
tants of the Colony. Many who have not availed themselves of the return 
passage to India have turned out to be trusty and 
useful domestic 
servants. 
That both the freed and free Indians have been very useful 
to the Colony generally can be proved by still more overwhelm-
ing proofs. 
The Commissioners in their report at page 82 say: 
19. 
They show commendable industry in fishing and fish-curing. 
284 
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI 
The Indian fishing settlement on Salisbury Island, in Durban Bay, has 
been of manifest advantage not only to the Indian but also to the white 
inhabitants of the Colony. 
20.  .  .  .  In numerous localities in the upland as well as in the 
Coast districts, they have converted waste and unproductive land into 
well-kept gardens, planted with vegetables, tobacco, maize and fruit trees. 
Those settled in the vicinity of Durban and Pietermaritzburg have succeed-
ed in winning for themselves almost entirely the supplying of the local 
markets with vegetables. 
It must be this competition by free Indians 
which has worked to the prejudice of those white Colonists who once 
had the monopoly of the trade. . . . In fairness to the free Indians we 
must observe that the competition is legitimate in its nature and that 
it certainly has been welcomed by the general community. From an 
early hour in the morning, Indian hawkers, male and female, adults 
and children, go busily with heavy baskets on their heads from house to 
house, and thus citizens can now daily, at their own doors, and at low 
rates, purchase wholesome vegetables and fruit, which, not many years 
ago, they could not with certainty procure even in the public markets, 
and at exorbitant prices. 
As to the traders the Commissioners' report at page 74 says: 
We are convinced that much of the irritation existing in the minds 
of European Colonists against the whole Indian population of the Colony 
has been excited by the undoubted ability of these Arab traders to com-
pete with European merchants, and specially with those who have chiefly 
directed their attention to the supply of articles, notably rice, largely con-
sumed by the Indian immigrant population .... 
We are of opinion that these Arab traders have been drawn to 
Natal by the presence therein of those Indians who have been introduced 
under the Immigration Laws. 
Rice is the chief food of the 30,000 Indian 
immigrants now in the Colony, and these astute traders have so success-
fully devoted their tact and energy to the supply of that article that the 
price to all consumers fell from 21 s per bag in former years to 14 s in 
1884. .  .  .  
It is said that Kaffirs can buy from Arabs at from 25 to 30 per cent 
lower rates than those obtaining six or seven years ago. 
It does not lie within the scope of our Commission to discuss at 
length the restrictive measure which some desire to impose upon Asiatics 
or "Arab" traders. We are content to place on record our strong opinion, based 
on much observation, that the presence of these traders has been beneficial to the 
whole Colony, 
and that it would be unwise, if not unjust, to legislate to their 
prejudice (the italics are mine). 
* 
* 
* 
THE INDIAN FRANCHISE 
285 
8.  .  .  .  Nearly all of them are Mahommedans, either total abstain-
ers from alcoholic liquors or drinking them in moderation. 
They are 
thrifty by nature and submissive to the law. 
Out of the 72 European witnesses who gave their evidence before the 
Commission, almost every one of those who spoke as to the presence of 
the Indian affecting the Colony has said that he is indispensable for its 
welfare. 
I have quoted the extracts at some length not to argue there-
from that the Indians should have the franchise (they have it 
already), but to refute the charge that the Indian is an intruder 
and the statement that he has nothing to do with the prosperity 
of the Colony. 
"The proof of the pudding lies in the eating." 
The best proof is that, no matter what is being said against the 
Indians, they are yet wanted; the Protector's Department is un-
able to cope with the demand for Indian labour. 
At page 5 of the Annual Report, 1895, the Protector says: 
At the close of last year there was an unsupplied balance of 1,330 
men to complete the year's indent. 
In addition to this number, 2,760 
men were applied for to arrive in 1895, making a total of 4,090. 
Of this 
number, 2,032 arrived 
during 
the 
year 
under report 
(1,049 from 
Madras and 983 from Calcutta), leaving a balance of 2,058 (less 12 men 
lapsed requisitions) to arrive during the present year to complete the 
last year's indent. 
If the Indian is really harmful to the Colony, the best and 
justest method is to stop further immigration and, in due course, 
the present Indian population will cease to trouble the Colony 
much. 
To have them under conditions that mean slavery is 
hardly fair. 
If then this appeal has at all satisfactorily answered the various 
objections raised to the Indian franchise; if the reader accepts 
the assertion that the franchise agitation on the part of the 
Indians is merely a protest against degradation, which the counter-
agitation contemplates, and not an attempt to gain political power 
or influence, I humbly think I am justified in asking the reader 
to pause and consider before he decides to oppose the Indian 
franchise tooth and nail. 
Although the "British subject" idea has 
been rejected by the Press as a craze and fad, I have to fall 
back upon that idea. 
Without it there would have been no 
franchise agitation whatever. 
Without it there would probably 
have been no State-aided immigration. 
Very probably the Indian 
would have been an impossibility in Natal if he were not a British 
286 
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI 
subject. 
I, therefore, appeal to every Briton in South Africa not 
to lightly dismiss the "British subject" idea from his mind. The 
Proclamation of 1858 was Her Majesty's act, presumably approved 
of by her subjects. 
For, it was done, not arbitrarily, but ac-
cording to the advice of her then advisers, in whom the voters, 
by their votes, had reposed their full trust. 
India belongs to 
England and England does not wish to lose her hold of India. 
Every act done by a Briton towards an Indian cannot but have 
some effect in moulding the final relations between Britons and 
Indians. It is, moreover, a fact that the Indian is in South 
Africa because he is a British subject; he has to be tolerated 
whether one likes it or not. 
Is it not then better that nothing 
should be done that would unnecessarily embitter the feelings bet-
ween the two communities? By coming to a hasty conclusion, or 
by forming conclusions on groundless assumptions, it is not at all 
unlikely that injustice may unintentionally be done to the Indians. 
The question in the minds of all reasonable men, I submit, 
should be not how to drive away the Indians from the Colony 
(for that is impossible), but how to bring about satisfactory re-
lations between the two communities. 
Even from a most selfish 
point of view, I submit, no good can result from an attitude of 
unfriendliness and hatred towards the Indians, unless there is any 
pleasure in creating in one's mind an unfriendly feeling towards 
one's neighbour. 
Such a policy is repugnant to the British Con-
stitution and the British sense of justice and fair play, and above 
all hateful to the spirit of Christianity which is professed by the 
objectors to the Indian franchise. 
I appeal more particularly to the Press, 
the public men 
throughout South Africa and the Clergy: Public opinion is in your 
hands. You mould and guide it. It is for you to consider whe-
ther the policy hitherto pursued is the right and proper one to 
continue. Your duty as Britons and leaders of public opinion can-
not be to divide the two communities but to weld them together. 
The Indians have many blemishes and they are themselves, 
no doubt, to blame to some extent for the present unsatisfactory 
state of feelings between the two peoples. My object is to induce 
you to believe that the blame does not entirely lie on one side 
alone. 
Often and often have I read in the papers and heard that 
the Indians have nothing to complain about. I submit that nei-
ther you nor the Indians here are capable of forming an impartial 
judgment. I, therefore, draw your attention entirely to the outside 
public opinion, to the Press, alike in England and India, which 
THE INDIAN FRANCHISE 
287 
is practically unanimous in coming to the conclusion that the 
Indians have a reasonable ground for complaint. And, in this con-
nection, I beg to deny the statement that has been often made 
that the outside opinion is based on exaggerated reports sent from 
South Africa by the Indians. I venture to claim to know something 
about the reports sent to England and India, and I have no hesi-
tation in saying that the reports sent almost invariably err on the 
side of underestimation. Not a single statement has been made 
which cannot be substantiated by unimpeachable evidence. But 
the most remarkable fact is that there is no dispute as to facts 
which are admitted. The outside opinion based on those admit-
ted facts is that the Indians are not fairly treated in South Africa. 
I will quote only one extract taken from a Radical newspaper, 
The Star. The opinion of the soberest journal in the world, The 
Times, is known to everyone in South Africa. 
The Star of 21st October, 1895, commenting upon the deputa-
tion that waited on Mr. Chamberlain, says: 
These particulars are enough to throw light upon the hateful per-
secution to which British Indian subjects are being subjected. 
The new 
Indian Immigration Law Amendment Bill, which virtually proposes to 
reduce Indians to a state of slavery, is another example. The thing is a 
monstrous wrong, an insult to British subjects, a disgrace to its authors, 
and a slight upon ourselves. 
Every Englishman is concerned to see that 
the commercial greed of the South African trader is not permitted to wreak 
such bitter injustice upon men who alike by Proclamation and by Statute 
are placed upon an equality with ourselves before the Law. 
If I could but convince you that the 'greatest kindness' is not 
shown to the Indian in South Africa and that the Europeans are 
also to blame for the prevailing state of things, a way will have 
been paved for a dispassionate discussion of the whole Indian ques-
tion, and perhaps it will be solved without any intervention from 
Downing Street to the satisfaction of both the parties concerned. 
Why should the Clergy remain silent on this momentous ques-
tion, momentous because it affects the future of South Africa? 
They do take part in politics pure and simple. They do attend 
the meetings 
convened to urge 
the disfranchisement of the 
Indians. But this is not merely a political question. Will they see 
a race degraded and insulted because of the 'unreasoning' preju-
dice against it and sit still? 
Is such indifference sanctioned by 
Christ's Christianity? 
I repeat again, it is not political power that the Indians 
want. It is degradation, it is many other consequences and mea-
288 
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI 
sures that will flow from and will be based on the disfranchisement 
that they dread and resist. 
In conclusion, I shall be deeply indebted to those who would 
read this and be kind enough to express their opinion about its 
subject-matter. Many Europeans have privately expressed their 
sympathy for the Indians and have strongly disapproved of the 
sweeping resolutions passed at the various meetings held in the 
Colony in connection with the Indian franchise and the bitter tone 
of the speeches made. If these gentlemen will come forward and 
have the courage of their convictions, I submit, they will have a 
fourfold reward. They will earn the gratitude of the 40,000 Indians 
in the Colony, indeed of the whole of India, and will render true 
service to the Colony by disabusing the minds of the Europeans 
of the notion that the Indian is a curse to the Colony; they will 
serve humanity by rescuing or assisting to rescue a portion of an 
ancient race from 
unwarranted persecution which they know 
exists in the whole of South Africa, and last but not least, in com-
mon with the noblest Britons, be the forgers of the links that 
will unite England and India in love and peace. I humbly submit 
that such an achievement is worth a little ridicule that the pio-
neers will be subjected to. To separate the two communities is easy 
enough, to unite them by the 'silken cord' of love is equally diffi-
cult. But then, everything that is worth having is also worth a great 
deal of trouble and anxiety. 
The Natal Indian Congress has been mentioned in connec-
tion with this matter and has been much misrepresented. In a 
separate pamphlet1 its objects and methods of working will be 
fully discussed. 
While this was in course of preparation, Mr. Maydon made a 
speech at Bellair and a curious resolution was passed at the meet-
ing. With the greatest deference to the honourable gentleman, I 
venture to take exception to his statement that the Indians have 
ever remained in a state of servitude and are, therefore, unfit for 
self-government. Although he invoked the aid of history in sup-
port of his statement, I venture to say that history fails to bear 
out the statement. In the first place Indian history does not date 
from the invasion of Alexander the Great. But I take the liberty 
to say that India of that date will compare very favourably with 
Europe of today. In support of that statement I beg to refer him 
to the Greek description of India at pp. 169-70 of Hunter's Indian 
Empire, partly quoted in my "Open Letter". What, however, of 
1 This is not available. 
THE INDIAN FRANCHISE 
289 
India of a period previous to that date? History says that the 
Aryans' home was not India but they came from Central Asia, 
and one family migrated to India and colonized it, the others to 
Europe. The government of that day was, so history says, a civi-
lized government in the truest sense of the term. The whole Aryan 
literature grew up then. The India of Alexander's time was India 
on the decline. When other nations were hardly formed, India 
was at its zenith, and the Indians of this age are descendants of 
that race. To say, therefore, that the Indians have been ever under 
servitude is hardly correct. India certainly has not proved uncon-
querable. If that be reason for disfranchisement, I have no-
thing to say except this, that every nation will, unfortunately, 
be found wanting in this respect. 
It is true England "wafts her 
sceptre" over India. The Indians are not ashamed of that fact. 
They are proud to be under the British Crown, 
because they 
think that England will prove India's deliverer. The wonder of 
all wonders seems to be that the Indians, like the favoured nation 
of the Bible, are irrepressible in spite of centuries of oppression 
and bondage. And many British writers think that India is under 
England with her consent. 
Professor Seeley says: 
The nations of India have been conquered by an army, of which, 
on the average, a fifth part was English. In the early battles of the Com-
pany, by which its power was decisively established, at the 
siege 
of 
Arcot, at Plassey, at Buxar, there seems always to have been more 
Sepoys than Europeans on the side of the Company. 
And, let us observe 
further, that we do not hear of the Sepoys fighting ill, of the English as 
bearing the whole brunt of the conflict. . . . But if once it is admitted that 
the Sepoys always outnumbered the English, and that they kept pace with 
the English in efficiency as soldiers, the whole theory, which attributes our 
success to an immeasurable natural superiority in valour, falls to the 
ground. 
—Digby's India for the Indians and for England 
The honourable gentleman1 is also reported to have said: 
We (the Colonists) were entrusted with responsible Government in 
Natal under certain circumstances. 
These have now become absolutely 
changed, brought about by your refusal to sanction our Bill. 
You have 
brought about a condition of things that is so fraught with danger that it 
is our clear duty to hand back to you the authority which you gave us. 
How contrary to facts is all this! It assumes that the Home 
Government are now trying to thrust the Indian franchise on the 
1 The reference is to Maydon; vide p. 288. 
I-19 
290 
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI 
Colony, while the fact is that the Responsible Government is try-
ing to materially alter the circumstances which existed at the 
time it was granted. Would not Downing Street be justified in 
saying, "We entrusted you with Responsible Government under 
certain circumstances. These have now become absolutely changed, 
brought about by your Bill of last year. You have brought about a 
condition of things that is so fraught with danger to the whole 
British Constitution and British notion of justice that it is our clear 
duty not to allow you to trifle with the fundamental principles on 
which the British Constitution is based."? 
The time when the Responsible Government was accepted 
was, I submit, the time when Mr. Maydon's objection might have 
been valid. Whether Responsible Government would ever have 
been granted, had the European Colonists insisted upon dis-
franchisement of the Indians is another question. 1 
From a pamphlet printed by T. L. Cullingworth, Printer, 
40 Field 
Street, Durban, 1895 
