8. 
INDIAN VEGETARIANS-II 
Indian vegetarians' food generally varies with the parts they 
live in. Thus in Bengal the staple article of food is rice, while in the 
Bombay Presidency it is wheat. 
All the Indians generally—and the grown-up persons parti-
cularly, and among them the high-caste Hindus—take two meals a 
day with a glass or two of water between the meals whenever they 
feel thirsty. The first meal they take at about 10 a.m., which would 
correspond to the English dinner, and the second meal at about 
8 p.m., which would correspond to supper so far as the name 
goes, though in reality, it is a substantial meal. From the above it 
will have been seen that there is no breakfast—which, seeing that 
the Indians generally rise at 6 o'clock, and even as early as four 
or five o'clock in the morning, they would seem to require—
nor the ordinary midday meal. Some of the readers will no doubt 
wonder how the Indians go about without anything to eat for 
nine hours after their first meal. This may be explained in two 
ways, viz., first, the habit is second nature. Their religion com-
mands some, and employment or custom compels others, to take 
not more than two meals in one day. Secondly, the climate of 
India, which except in some parts is very hot, will account for the 
habit. For even in England, it appears that the same quantity of 
food is not required in summer as in winter. Unlike the English, 
the Indians do not take each dish separately, but they mix many 
things together. Among some of the Hindus it is one of the 
requirements of their religion to mix all their food together. More-
over, every dish is elaborately prepared. In fact they don't believe 
in plain boiled vegetables, but must have them flavoured with 
plenty of condiments, e.g., pepper, salt, cloves, turmeric, mustard 
seed, and various other things for which it would be difficult to 
find English names unless they be those used in medicine. 
The first meal consists generally of bread or rather cakes—
of which more hereafter—some pulse, e.g., peas, haricot beans, 
etc., and two or three green vegetables cooked together, or sepa-
rately, followed by rice and pulse cooked in water, and flavoured 
with various spices. After this, some take milk and rice, or simply 
milk, or curdled milk, or even whey, 
especially in summer. 
The second meal, i.e., the supper, consists of much the same 
things as the first one, but the quantity is less and the vege-
tables fewer at this meal. Milk is more liberally used at this meal. 
INDIAN VEGETARIANS—III 
21 
The reader should be reminded that this is not the food that the 
Indians invariably use nor should he think that the above will be 
the typical dishes all over India and among all classes. Thus, for 
example, no sweets are mentioned in the specimen meals while 
they are sure to be used among the well-to-do classes at least once 
a week. Moreover, while, as said above, wheat preponderates over 
rice in the Bombay Presidency, in Bengal rice gets the better of 
wheat. So also with regard to the third exception which must prove 
the rule, the food among the labouring class is different from 
what is given above. To mention all the varieties would be to fill 
up volumes and to do so would, it is to be feared, divest the 
article of all interest. 
Butter, or if you please, clarified butter, is much more used for 
culinary purposes than in England or, it may be, even in Europe. 
And according to a doctor of some authority, if it would do no 
good, much use of butter, in a hot climate like that of India would 
do no harm such as it might do in a cold climate like that of 
England. 
It will perhaps strike the reader that the fruit, yes, the all-
important fruit, is sadly conspicuous by its absence in the above-
mentioned specimen dishes. Some, among many of the reasons, 
are that the Indians do not know the proper value of fruit, that 
the poor people cannot afford to buy good fruit, and that good 
fruit is not available all over India, except in large cities. 
Indeed, 
there are certain fruits, not to be found here, which are used by 
all classes in India; but alas, these are used as superficial things, 
not as food, and no one knows their value chemically, because 
no one takes the trouble to analyse them. 
The Vegetarian, 14-2-1891 
