80. 
VEGETARIANISM IN NATAL 
It is an uphill battle to fight in Natal, and, indeed, in South 
Africa. Yet there are few places where vegetarianism would be 
more conducive to health, or more economical or practicable. 
Of course, at present, it is hardly economical and it certainly 
requires a great deal of self-denial to remain a vegetarian. To 
become one seems almost an impossibility. "It is all very well 
in London, where there are scores of vegetarian restaurants, but 
how can you become or remain a vegetarian in South Africa, 
where you find very little nourishing vegetarian food?" has been 
the invariable reply to my enquiries, in the course of conversation 
on the matter with scores of men. One would have thought such 
a reply would be impossible in South Africa, seeing that it en-
joys a semi-tropical climate, and its vegetable resources are in-
exhaustible. Nevertheless, 
the reply is entirely justifiable. In 
the best of hotels you find, as a rule, potatoes the only vege-
table at lunch-time, and that badly cooked. At dinner-time you 
find, perhaps, two vegetables, and the vegetable menu is hardly 
ever changed. It is little short of a scandal that in this Garden 
Colony of South Africa, where, at the proper time, you can get 
1 For Press reactions to this pamphlet, vide The Early Phase, pp. 592-6. 
VEGETARIANISM IN NATAL 
291 
fruit for a song, you find very little fruit at the hotels. Pulses 
are conspicuous by their absence. A gentleman wrote to me to ask 
if it was possible to buy pulses in Durban; he could not pro-
cure them in Charlestown and the neighbouring townships. Nuts 
can only be bought at Christmas time. 
Such are the present circumstances. Vegetarian friends, there-
fore, need not wonder if I can report very little perceptible pro-
gress as a result of nearly nine months' advertising and quiet per-
suasion. Nor are the above the only difficulties in the way of vege-
tarian propaganda. People here think of very little else than 
gold. The gold fever is so infectious in these regions that it has 
smitten the highest and the lowest, the spiritual teachers inclu-
ded. They find no time for higher pursuits of life; they find no 
time to think of the beyond. 
Copies of The Vegetarian are supplied regularly every week 
to most of the libraries. Occasional advertisements are inserted 
in the newspapers. Every opportunity is availed of to introduce 
the subject of vegetarianism. So far this has given rise to some 
sympathetic correspondence and enquiries. A few books have also 
been bought. Many more have been distributed. Correspondence 
and conversation have not been devoid of humour. A lady, who 
corresponded with me in connection with Esoteric Christianity, 
became angry on finding that Esoteric Christianity had any-
thing to do with vegetarianism. She was so disgusted that she 
returned the books lent her without reading them. One gentle-
man thought it disgraceful for a man to shoot or slaughter an 
animal. "He would not do it for the life of him," but he had no 
compunction in eating the meat prepared for him. 
The possibilities of South Africa, and particularly of Natal, 
from a vegetarian standpoint, are too numerous to mention, 
only there are no vegetarian workers. The soil is so fertile that 
it would grow almost anything. Vast tracts of land await only a 
skilful hand to turn them into real mines of gold. If a few men 
could be induced to turn their attention from the Johannesburg 
gold to the quieter method of earning money by cultivation, and 
to get rid of their colour prejudice, there is no doubt that every 
variety of vegetable and fruit could be grown in Natal. The 
climate of South Africa is such that the Europeans alone will never 
be able to work the soil as much as is possible. They have got the 
Indians to help them, but they simply would not make use of them 
owing to the colour prejudice, which is so strong in South Africa. 
Even in Natal, where the prosperity of the Colony admittedly 
depends upon the Indian labour, the prejudice is very strong. I 
292 
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI 
have a letter from a gardener who, much as he would like to 
employ Indian labour, is handicapped owing to this prejudice. 
Vegetarians, therefore, have a scope for patriotic work. The line 
of marriage between white British subjects and Indians is getting 
thicker day by day in South Africa. The best English and Indian 
statesmen are of opinion that Britain and India can be indissolubly 
united by the chain of love. The spiritualists anticipate good 
results from such a union. The South African white British subjects 
are doing their utmost to retard, and, if possible, to prevent such 
a union. 
It may be that some vegetarians may come forward 
to arrest such a catastrophe. 
I would venture to make one suggestion and then close this 
hurriedly written resume of the work in Natal. If some men of 
means, and well up in vegetarian literature, were to travel in 
different parts of the world, explore the resources of the different 
countries, report upon their possibilities from a vegetarian stand-
point, and invite vegetarians to migrate to those countries which 
they may consider suitable for vegetarian propaganda, and, at 
the same time, worth settling in from a pecuniary point of view, 
much vegetarian work can be done, openings can be found for 
poor vegetarians, and real centres of vegetarianism can 
be 
established in various parts of the world. 
But then vegetarianism, in order to do this, should be a reli-
gion, and not merely a hygienic convenience. The platform will 
have to be shifted much higher. 
The Vegetarian, 21-12-1895 
