81. LETTER TO "THE NATAL MERCURY" 
DURBAN, 
February 3, 1896 
TO 
THE EDITOR 
The Natal Mercury 
SIR, 
As one interested in food reform, permit me to congratulate 
you on your leader in Saturday's issue on "The New Science of 
Healing", which lays so much stress on the adoption of the natu-
ral food, i.e., vegetarianism. But for the unfortunate characteris-
tic of this "self-indulgent" age, in which "nothing is more com-
mon than to hear men warmly supporting a theory in the abstract 
LETTER TO "THE NATAL MERCURY" 
293 
without any intention of submitting to it in practice", we should 
all be vegetarians. For, why should it be otherwise when Sir Henry 
Thompson calls it "a vulgar error" to suppose that flesh foods are 
indispensable for our sustenance, and the most eminent physio-
logists declare that fruit is the natural food of man, and when we 
have the example of Buddha, Pythagoras, Plato, Porphyry, Ray, 
Daniel, Wesley, Howard, Shelley, Sir Isaac Pitman, Edison, Sir 
W. B. Richardson, and a host of other eminent men as vegetarians? 
The Christian vegetarians claim that Jesus was also a vegetarian, 
and there does not seem to be anything to oppose that view, ex-
cept the reference to His having eaten broiled fish after the Resur-
rection. The most successful missionaries in South Africa (the 
Trappists) are vegetarians. Looked at from every point of view, 
vegetarianism has been demonstrated to be far superior to flesh-
eating. The Spiritualists hold, and the practice of the religious 
teachers of all the religions, except, perhaps, the generality of 
Protestant teachers shows, that nothing is more detrimental to the 
spiritual faculty of man than the gross feeding on flesh. The most 
ardent vegetarians attribute the agnosticism, the materialism, and 
the religious indifference of the present age to too much flesh-
eating and wine-drinking, and the consequent disappearance, par-
tial or total, of the spiritual faculty in man. Vegetarian admirers 
of the intellectual in man point to the whole host of the most in-
tellectual men of the world, who were invariably abstemious in 
their habits, especially at the time of writing their best works, to 
demonstrate the sufficiency, if not the superiority, of the vege-
tarian diet from an intellectual standpoint. The columns of the 
vegetarian magazines and reviews afford a most decisive proof 
that where beef and its concoctions, with no end of physic thrown 
in, have lamentably failed, vegetarianism has triumphantly suc-
ceeded. Muscular vegetarians demonstrate the superiority of their 
diet by pointing out that the peasantry of the world are practi-
cally vegetarians, and that the strongest and most useful animal, 
the horse, is a vegetarian, while the most ferocious and practically 
useless animal, the lion, is a carnivore. Vegetarian moralists 
mourn over the fact that selfish men would—for the sake of grati-
fying their lustful and diseased appetite—force the butcher's trade 
on a portion of mankind, while they themselves would shrink with 
horror from such a calling. They moreover lovingly implore us to 
bear in mind that without the stimulants of flesh foods and wine it 
is difficult enough to restrain our passions and escape Satan's 
clutches, and not to add to those difficulties by resorting to meats 
and drinks which, as a rule, go hand in hand. For, it is claimed 
294 
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI 
that vegetarianism, in which juicy fruits find the foremost place, 
is the safest and surest cure for drunkenness, while meat-eating 
induces or increases the habit. They also argue that since meat-
eating is not only unnecessary but harmful to the system, indul-
gence in it is immoral and sinful, because it involves the infliction 
of unnecessary pain on and cruelty towards harmless animals. Last-
ly, vegetarian economists, without fear of contradiction, assert 
that vegetarian foods are the cheapest diet, and their general adop-
tion will go a long way towards mitigating, if not altogether sup-
pressing, the rapidly growing pauperism side by side with the 
rapid march of the materialistic civilization and the accumulation 
of immense riches in the hands of a few. So far as I recollect, Dr. 
Louis Kuhne urges the necessity of vegetarianism on physiological 
grounds only, and does not give any hints for beginners, who al-
ways find it difficult to select the right kinds from a variety of 
vegetarian foods and to cook them properly. I have a selection 
of vegetarian cookery books (at from 1d to 1s), as also treatises 
on the subject dealing with its various aspects. The cheapest books 
are given away, and if any of your readers feel disposed, not mere-
ly to admire the new science of healing from a distance, but to 
put its tenets into practice, I shall be very glad to supply them 
with what pamphlets I possess on the subject, so far as it relates 
to vegetarianism. I submit the following for the consideration 
of those who believe in the Bible. Before the "Fall" we were 
vegetarians: 
And God said: behold, I have given you every herb bearing seed 
which is upon the face of all the earth, and every tree in which is fruit 
of a tree yielding seed; to you it shall be for meat. And to every beast of 
the earth, and to every fowl of the air, and to everything that creepeth 
upon the earth, wherein there is life, I have given every green herb for 
meat; and it was so. 
There may be some excuse for the unconverted partaking of meat, 
but for those who say they are "born again", vegetarian Chris-
tians claim, there can be none; because their state surely should be 
equal, if not superior, to that of the people before the "Fall". 
Again, in times of Restitution: 
The wolf also shall dwell with the lamb, and the leopard shall lie 
down with the kid; and the calf and the young lion and the fatling to-
gether; and a little child shall lead them .... And the lion shall eat 
straw like the ox. . . . They shall not hurt nor destroy in all my holy 
mountains; for the earth shall be full of the knowledge of the Lord, as 
the waters cover the sea. 
MEMORIAL TO NATAL GOVERNOR 
295 
These times may be far off yet for the whole world. But why 
cannot those who know and can—the Christians—enact them for 
themselves at any rate? There can be no harm in anticipating 
them, and, maybe, thereby their approach may be considerably 
hastened. 
I am, etc., 
M. K. GANDHI 
The Natal Mercury, 4-2-1896 
