83. LETTER TO "THE NATAL MERCURY" 
DURBAN, 
March 2, 1896 
TO 
THE EDITOR 
The Natal Mercury 
SIR, 
In justice to the two defendants, Roberts and Richards, whom 
the worthy Superintendent of Police is pleased to call "upstarts" 
and other bad names, and in justice to the Indian community, I 
beg to encroach upon your space with reference to the partial 
report of the case in which the two defendants were charged 
under the Vagrancy Law and the Superintendent's views there-
on that appeared in your issue of the 29th February. The report 
and the opinion would seem to show that Mr. Waller's decision2 
is a miscarriage of justice. To give colour to that view, the 
Superintendent has elected to give that portion of the evidence 
which I wished, and still wish, to use in order to win public 
sympathy for the two defendants, and what is more, for people 
placed in a similar position. 
I humbly think that theirs was a very hard case, and that the 
police erred in arresting them, and, afterwards, in harassing them. 
I said in the Court, and I repeat, that the Vagrant Law would 
cease to be oppressive if the police showed some consideration for 
the Indians and used discretion in arresting them. The fact that 
1 The memorial was rejected on February 27, on the ground that the 
Regulations were identical with those of September 28, 1891, in operation in 
regard to the Eshowe township; vide "Letter to C. Walsh", 4-3-1896. 
2 Mr. Waller, Police Magistrate, dismissed the case on the ground that 
so long as a coloured man, found out of doors after 9 p.m. without a pass, told 
the police he was going home, it was sufficient answer to clear himself, as the 
law stated that only a coloured person found wandering between the hours 
of 9 p.m. and 5 a.m. without a pass from his employer, or not giving a good 
account of himself, may be arrested. 
298 
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI 
both are sons of indentured Indians should not go against them, 
especially in an English community, where a man's worth, not 
birth, is taken into account in judging him. If that were not so, 
a butcher's son would not have been honoured as the greatest poet. 
The Superintendent, then, makes much of the fact that the second 
defendant changed his name about two years ago, and tries there-
by to excuse the wanton insult1 to which he was submitted by the 
constable who arrested him. It should be remembered that the 
constable in charge knew nothing whatever as to when the name 
was changed, and surely his very features were sufficient to betray 
his nationality had he attempted, as the Superintendent supposes 
he did, to cover his nationality in order to escape the operation 
of the Vagrant Law. Nor did he seem to be ashamed of his name 
or birth, for the answers came almost simultaneously with the 
questions as to birth and name, and seemed so much to please the 
amiable Superintendent as to extort the following expression from 
him: "Yes, my boy, if all were like you, the police would have 
no difficulty." 
There can be nothing absolutely wrong in changing one's 
name unless it is wrong to change one's religion. 
To compare 
small things with great, Mr. Quilliam has become Haji Abdullah 
because he has become a Mahomedan. Mr. Webb, the late Consul-
General of Manica, also adopted a Mahomedan name, on adopt-
ing the Mahomedan faith. Not only the Christian name but the 
Christian dress also is an offence for an Indian, according to the 
view of the constables. And now, according to the Superin-
tendent's view, change of religion would render an Indian liable 
to suspicion. But why should this be so, assuming, of course, 
that the change is a result of honest belief and not a dodge to 
evade the law? In the present case I assume that both the de-
fendants are honest Christians because I am told both are res-
pected by Dr. Booth2. Of course, the Superintendent will retort, 
"But how is a man to know whether a man is an honest Christian 
or a Satan in the Christian garb?" This is a difficult question to 
answer. I submitted to the Court that each case could be judged 
on its own merits, and that the benefit of the ordinary presump-
tions should be given to the Indians, as it is given to other classes. 
1 The constable laughed at him when the defendant gave his name as 
Samuel Richards. 
2 Head of St. Aidan's Mission, Durban, he supervised a small charitable 
hospital founded by Indians. In 1899, during the Boer War, Dr. Booth helped 
to train the Indian Ambulance Corps. 
LETTER TO "THE NATAL MERCURY" 
299 
I submitted that two men, wearing a respectable dress, walk-
ing quietly along the main street at 9.30 p.m., stopping when 
questioned, protesting that they were returning from the gardens 
and were on their way home, which was not seven minutes' walk 
from the place where they were stopped, that one of them was a 
clerk and the other a teacher (as was the case with the two un-
fortunate boys), may be given the benefit of the ordinary presump-
tion. I submitted further that in cases like this the police might, if 
they suspected, see their charge safely home. But, even if that 
could not be done, they might be treated as respectable men under 
custody and not be prejudged to be thieves and robbers. 
The 
remarks about dress and religion and name might conveniently 
be postponed till they could be proved to be hypocrites. 
About a year ago I was travelling from Standerton to Dur-
ban. Two of my fellow-passengers were suspected to be thieves. 
Their luggage, and with theirs mine also, because I was in the 
same compartment, was examined at Volksrust, and a detective 
was placed in the compartment. They could offer a glass of 
whisky to the Landdrost1, who came to examine the luggage and 
talk to the detective as gentlemen and on equal terms, presum-
ably because they were respectably dressed and were first-class 
passengers. The detective did not prejudge them. I must not omit 
to mention that they were Europeans. The detective all the way 
through was sorry that he had to perform the unpleasant duty. 
May I plead for the same treatment in cases like that of the un-
fortunate boys? Instead of the cell they might have been given 
some other place to lie in. They might have been given clean 
blankets to lie on if the cell could not be avoided. The constables 
might have spoken to them kindly. 
Had this been done the 
case would never have come before the Magistrate. 
I venture to take exception to the Superintendent's state-
ment that "these young upstarts elected to be locked up all night 
in preference to bail". The reverse is the truth. They offered bail 
and it was refused during the night. The Magistrate was not 
pleased with this treatment. They renewed their request to be 
bailed out in the morning. The request of the second defendant 
was granted. The constable refused to bail out the first. Against 
his name was marked: "not to be released". The book containing 
that remark was produced in the Court. Later, he was released at 
the instance of Inspector Benny, who promptly remedied the 
mistake as soon as he came to know of it. 
1 South African judge, also inspector or officer 
300 
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI 
With deference to the Superintendent, I beg to say that the 
first defendant did not defy the law. The Magistrate made no 
order; but he, in his fatherly and kind manner, suggested that I 
should advise him to get the Mayor's pass1. I submitted that such 
was not necessary but said that in deference to his suggestion I 
would do so. The defendant has now received a reply from the 
Town Clerk that the pass will not be issued to him, a clerk and 
Sunday School teacher, having never been charged with any 
criminal offence. If he is not fit to be out after 9 p.m. he cannot 
be fit to be a Sunday School teacher. 
One would think that it is 
less dangerous for him to be out after nine than for him to be a 
Sunday School teacher who would mould the character of tender 
children. The Superintendent says that his force "has never inter-
fered with the Arab merchants or other respectable coloured men 
at night". Were not these two boys fit to be ranked among 
"other respectable coloured men"? I appeal to him, and entreat 
him to consider well whether he himself would have arrested these 
two boys. I say in his own words, "If his whole force were as 
considerate and amiable as himself there would be no difficulty." 
I think, in dealing with my "Open Letter", you were kind 
enough to say that cases of real grievance will readily command 
your sympathy. Do you consider this case a real grievance? If 
you do, I ask your sympathy so that cases like the above may not 
occur again. I have found it difficult to ask respectable Indian 
youths who may care for my advice to take out passes from their 
masters. I have asked them to take out the Mayor's pass of 
exemption. But since the first application has been refused, it 
has damped the zeal of the others. If the public approve of such 
arrests the police may be induced to repeat them in spite of the 
Magistrate's opinion to the contrary. The Press, therefore, by its 
opinion can either make it easier for apparently respectable 
Indians to take out the Mayor's pass of exemption, or else almost 
impossible for the police to repeat such arrests. There is the re-
course to a suit against the Corporation. But that is a recourse 
to be had in the last resort. 
I am, etc., 
M. K. GANDHI 
The Natal Mercury, 6-3-1896 
1 Of exemption 
