88. 
MEMORIAL TO J. CHAMBERLAIN 
DURBAN, NATAL, 
March 11, 1896 
TO 
THE RIGHT HON'BLE JOSEPH CHAMBERLAIN, 
HER MAJESTY'S PRINCIPAL SECRETARY OF STATE FOR 
THE COLONIES, 
LONDON 
THE 
MEMORIAL OF 
THE 
UNDERSIGNED 
INDIANS 
REPRESENTING THE INDIAN COMMUNITY IN NATAL 
HUMBLY SHEWETH THAT: 
Your Memorialists hereby venture to approach Her Majesty's 
Government with regard to certain Rules and Regulations in 
connection with the Township of Nondweni, Zululand, published 
in the Natal Government Gazette dated the 25th February, 1896, 
in so far as the said Regulations affect the rights of Her 
Majesty's Indian subjects to own or acquire property in the 
Township of Nondweni, as also with regard to similar Regula-
tions for the Township of Eshowe in Zululand. 
The portion of the Regulations affecting the British Indians 
is as follows: 
Part of Section 4—Persons of European birth or descent intending to 
bid at any such sale (i.e., sale of erven) must give notice in writing at 
least twenty days prior to the date fixed for the sale to the Secretary 
for Zululand, etc. 
Part of Section 18—Only persons of European birth or descent shall 
be approved of as occupiers of erven or sites. 
On failure of compliance 
with this condition any such sites or erven shall revert to the Government 
as in the preceding section hereof. 
Part of Section 20—It shall be a distinct condition subject to which 
the erven or sites are sold, and which condition shall be inserted in every 
freehold title applied for and issued in terms of Sections 10, 11 and 13 
of the Regulations, that at no time shall the owner of sites or erven in the 
Nondweni Township bought hereunder be at liberty either to sell or let 
such sites or erven or any portion thereof or to permit occupation of them, 
or any portion thereof free of rent, to any other persons except those of 
European birth and descent, and in the event of the holder of such title-
deed contravening such conditions and stipulations, any such sites or erven 
MEMORIAL TO J. 
CHAMBERLAIN 
305 
shall revert to the Government in terms and manner stated in Section 
17 hereof. 
The next day after the publication of the Gazette containing 
the Nondweni Regulations your Memorialists petitioned His Ex-
cellency the Governor of Zululand praying that the Regulations 
may be so altered or amended as to do away with the colour dis-
tinction therein. 
In reply to the said Memorial1 a copy whereof is annexed 
hereto, your Memorialists were informed that the Regulations 
were "the same as the Regulations in force for the Eshowe Town-
ship proclaimed by His Excellency's predecessor on 28th Septem-
ber 1891". Thereupon a request was made, on the 4th March, 
1896, to the effect that both the Regulations should be altered or 
amended with regard to the British Indians. 
A reply thereto was received on the 5th March, 1896, to the 
effect that the Governor did not feel justified in acting on the sug-
gestion. 
Your Memorialists confidently trust that the wrong in-
flicted upon the Indian community is so manifest that it has only 
to be brought to the notice of Her Majesty's Government to be 
remedied. If such an invidious and, your Memorialists respectfully 
submit, unnecessary distinction cannot be permitted in self-gover-
ning Colonies, 
much less should it be permitted in a Crown 
Colony. 
Many of your Memorialists own property in Zululand. In the 
year 1889, when the Township of Melmoth was sold, the Indian 
community laid out nearly £2,000 in the purchase of erven in that 
Township. 
Your Memorialists respectfully submit, it is absolutely neces-
sary that the Indian community should be allowed to purchase 
land in Zululand freely, if only for the reason that they may be 
able to make their outlay of the £2,000 profitable. 
Even the Government organ2 in Natal considered the wrong 
so serious that, though as a rule hostile to the Indian aspira-
tions, it viewed the Memorial to the Government of Zululand very 
favourably. The remarks are so apt that your Memorialists crave 
leave to quote them below: 
Zululand is likely soon to have an Indian question all its own. 
The rules and regulations published in the Government Gazette last Tues-
1 Vide "Memorial to Natal Governor", 26-2-1896. 
2 The reference is to The Natal Mercury; vide "Memorial to J. Chamberlain", 
11-8-1895. 
I-20 
306 
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI 
day for the disposal of erven in the newly-declared township of Nondweni 
include a number of sections which specially prevent all but persons of 
European birth or descent from purchasing property in the township, or 
even occupying any property in the township. 
The Indians, ever to the 
fore in such 
matters, have promptly sent a protest to the Governor 
against the promulgation of such rules and regulations, and seeing that 
Zululand is still a Crown Colony, and, therefore, more under the direct 
eyes of the Imperial authorities, we cannot very well see how such rules 
can be enforced when there is evidently so strong a disposition on the 
part of the Home Government to prevent the Franchise Law Amendment 
Bill passed in Natal from becoming law. From the protest presented by the 
Indians, we gather that some of them already own freehold property in 
Zululand, and, if this be the case, apart from any other reason, it seems 
to us the Memorialists have a cause for consideration. 
There may be 
some special provision as regards the occupation of land in the Zulu 
country which prohibits Indians from becoming property-holders, but still 
the fact remains that the territory is a Crown Colony, and this being 
so, it seems strange that rules and regulations can be made for that 
country which are not permitted in Natal, a responsibly-governed Colony. 
So frequently do the colour distinctions creep in into the rules 
and regulations, laws and bye-laws published in various parts of 
South Africa, that it is impossible for the Indian community, con-
sisting, as it does, chiefly of traders and artisans with a know-
ledge sufficient only for the requirements of trade and, in many 
cases, even without it, to keep itself informed of all the legislation 
affecting its rights and bring it to the notice of Her Majesty's 
Government. 
And things have come to such a pass that your Memorialists 
cannot expect redress from the local authorities, even in cases 
where the wrong complained of is a result of an oversight of the 
fundamental principles of the British Constitution, as in the pre-
sent instance. 
Your Memorialists fear that, if a Crown Colony can refuse 
property rights to a portion of Her Majesty's subjects, the Govern-
ments of the South African Republic and the Orange 
Free 
State would in a greater measure be justified in doing likewise 
or even going further. 
Your Memorialists submit that the existence of the colour 
distinction in the Regulations for Eshowe should not be a justi-
fication for similar Regulations for Nondweni. If those for Eshowe 
are bad, rather, your Memorialists submit, should both be altered 
and amended so as not to affect the just rights of the British Indian 
subjects. 
MEMORIAL TO J. CHAMBERLAIN 
307 
Your Memorialists further venture to draw your attention 
to the fact that constant class legislation affecting Her Majesty's 
Indian subjects not only causes a great deal of anxiety to the 
Indian community in South Africa, but the petitions that have 
to be frequently made to have such legislation altered cause a 
great deal of expense which the Indian community, by no means 
in an over-prosperous condition, can ill afford to incur, not to 
mention the fact that such a state of constant unrest and irrita-
tion seriously interferes with the business of the Indian community 
as a whole. 
Nothing short of an enquiry into the position and status of 
the British Indians in South Africa, and a notification calling upon 
the authorities in South Africa to ensure the equality of treatment 
of Her Majesty's Indian subjects with all the other British subjects 
will, in your Memorialists' humble opinion, prevent the social and 
civil extinction of Her Majesty's loyal and law-abiding Indian 
subjects. 
Your Memorialists, therefore, humbly pray that Her Majes-
ty's Government will order alteration or amendment of the Eshowe 
and Nondweni Townships Regulations so as to remove the dis-
abilities that they, in their present form, entail on Her Majesty's 
Indian subjects, and further humbly suggest that orders may be 
issued forbidding future class legislation affecting them. 
And for this act of justice and mercy, your Memorialists, as 
in duty bound, shall for ever pray, etc., etc.1 
(SD.) ABDUL KARIM HAJEE ADAM 
AND OTHERS 
From a photostat: S.N. 3620 
1 On April 10, in reply to a question by Mancherjee M. Bhownaggree, 
in the House of Commons, Chamberlain promised to look into this memorial on 
receiving it. The Imperial Government ultimately removed the prohibition. 
