89. LETTER TO "THE NATAL WITNESS" 
DURBAN, 
April 4, 1896 
TO 
THE EDITOR 
The Natal Witness 
SIR, 
I would be much obliged if you could find space for the fol-
lowing by way of answer to "G.W.W.", who wrote to you under 
date 11th March last, and did me the honour to criticize my 
pamphlet1 on the Indian franchise. 
While I thank "G.W.W." for the personal fairness he has 
shown me in his treatment of the pamphlet, I wish he had treated 
the subject-matter of the "Appeal" as fairly. 
If he had read it 
with an unbiased mind, I think he would not have found any cause 
to differ from the views therein expressed. I have endeavoured to 
treat the subject from such a standpoint as would induce the 
European Colonists to extend ungrudgingly the hand of fellow-
ship to the Indians without being elbowed out of their present posi-
tion in so doing. I still maintain that there is no cause whatever 
for alarm, and if the European Colonists would only let the agita-
tion die and consent to resume the status quo, they would find that 
their vote would not be swamped by the Indians. I further submit 
that, if ever such a contingency were to arise, it could be dealt 
with in anticipation, without the necessity of introducing colour 
distinction directly or indirectly. A real and reasonable educa-
tional test would perhaps for ever put a stop to the danger (if 
ever there be any) of the Indian vote swamping the European, 
and would, so far as possible, keep the Roll clear of the most objec-
tionable European voters also, if any. 
"G.W.W." takes exception to the arguments drawn from the 
relative strength of the true votes and "calls attention to what 
the next year's Roll may contain". I beg to call his attention to 
the fact that, although the Indians had every opportunity to 
"swamp" the List last year and the year before last, and every 
incentive to do so because of the fear as to the result of the Fran-
chise Act, now about to be repealed, there were no additions to 
1 Vide "The Indian Franchise", 16-12-1895. 
LETTER TO "THE NATAL WITNESS" 
309 
the number of Indian voters. It must have been either extraordi-
nary apathy or want of qualifications that could account for such 
a result. But it could not have been any such apathy, for the "agi-
tation" has been on foot for the last two years. 
I, however, do not propose to examine "G.W.W." 's letter in 
detail, for want of time and space, and will merely give the infor-
mation he asks for, and apply it to the new Bill to be introduced 
during the forthcoming session. 
Mr. Curzon, the then Under-Secretary of State for India, 
in moving the second reading of the India Councils Act (1861) 
Amendment Bill, said, among other things: 
The object of the Bill, which it is my duty to expound to the House, 
is to widen the basis and extend the function of the Government of India, 
to give further opportunity than at present exists to the non-official and 
the native element in Indian society to take part in the work of govern-
ment and in this way to lend official recognition to that remarkable 
development, both in political industry and political capacity, which has 
been visible among the higher classes of Indian society since the Govern-
ment of India was taken over by the Crown in 1858. 
This Bill is one to 
amend the India Councils Act of 1861. 
Legislative powers of some sort 
or other, but powers of a somewhat confused character and conflicting 
validity, have existed in India for a very long time. 
They existed with 
the rule of the old East India Company dating from the date of the 
Charters of the Tudor and Stuart Sovereigns; but the modern legislative 
system, under which India at present exists, owes its origin to the viceroy-
alty of Lord Canning and to the Secretaryship of State of Sir C. Wood, 
who was afterwards elevated to the peerage. 
Sir C. Wood, in 1861, carried 
through the House the India Councils Act of the year. ... The Act of 1861 
constituted three Legislative Councils in India—the Supreme Council of 
the Viceroy and the Provincial Councils of Madras and Bombay. 
The 
Supreme Legislative Council of the Viceroy only consists of the Governor-
General and his Executive Council, and is recruited by a minimum of six 
and a maximum of twelve additional members who are nominated by the 
Governor-General, of whom at least half must be non-official, whether they 
are drawn from the European or the native element. 
The Legislative 
Councils of Madras and Bombay are also recruited by a minimum of four 
and a maximum of eight additional members, who are nominated by the 
Provincial Governor, of whom at least half must be non-official. 
Since 
the passing of that Act, Legislative Councils have also been called into exis-
tence in Bengal and the North-West Provinces. 
In the case of Bengal, the 
Council 
consists of the Lieutenant-Governor and twelve nominated 
Councillors, and, in the case of the North-West Provinces, of the Lieute-
nant-Governor and nine nominated Councillors, of whom one-third in 
310 
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI 
each case must be non-official. ... A number of native gentlemen of 
intelligence and capacity and public spirit have been persuaded to come 
forward and to lend their services to the function of government, and 
undoubtedly the standard of merit of these Legislative Councils has stood 
high. 
The Amending Act gives the right to discuss the Budget and 
the right of interpellation (rights hitherto not enjoyed). 
It also 
increases the number of members of the Council, and provides 
(vaguely) for a system of election. Of course, the Act is merely 
permissive. 
According to the regulations issued under the above Act, out 
of eighteen seats for additional members for the Bombay Council, 
eight seats are filled by election. And the Corporation of Bombay 
(itself a representative body), such Municipal Corporations, or 
group or groups thereof, other than the Bombay Corporation, as 
the Governor-in-Council may from time to time prescribe, Dis-
trict Local Boards, or groups as above prescribed, the Sardars 
of the Deccan, or such other class of large landholders as above 
prescribed, associations of merchants, 
tradesmen or manufac-
turers, prescribed as above, and the Senate of the University of 
Bombay, have the power to elect those members by a majority of 
votes. Similar rules are published for the election by or "nomi-
nation on the recommendation of" the various representative 
bodies of the various provinces which have Legislative Councils. 
There is no class or colour distinction as to the franchise or 
the representatives elected. The member (Indian) for the Bombay 
Council in the Supreme Legislative Council having resigned, the 
candidates are Indians and a European. The result should be 
known by the next week's mail. 
I will only give one extract showing how this and municipal 
representation have been viewed by the most eminent men quali-
fied to speak on such subjects with authority. Delivering a lecture 
before the Society of Arts, Sir William Wilson Hunter said on the 
15th February, 1893: 
The Indian Municipalities, to which our Chairman, Lord Ripon, 
gave so memorable an impulse, had under their administration in 1891 
a population of 15,000,000 and of the 10,585 members who sat on their 
Boards or Councils, more than one-half were elected by the ratepayers. 
The representative principle is now being cautiously extended under Lord 
Cross's Act of 1892 to the Legislative Councils both of the Supreme and 
Provincial Governments. 
Portion of the Proclamation of 1858 runs: 
LETTER TO "THE NATAL WITNESS" 
311 
We hold ourselves bound to the natives of our Indian territories 
by the same obligations of duty which bind us to all our other subjects, 
... and it is our further will that, so far as may be, our subjects, of 
whatever race or creed, be freely and impartially admitted to offices in our 
service, the duties of which they may be qualified by their education, 
ability, and integrity duly to discharge. 
Looking at the new Franchise Bill in the light of these facts, 
it is very difficult to understand it. The question before the 
Colonists is very simple. 
Is it necessary to disfranchise the Indian 
community? If it is, I submit that the proof of the fact that they 
enjoy representative institutions in India will not make it less 
so.1 If it is not, why harass Indians by ambiguous legislation? If 
the answer to the question whether or not the Indians enjoy re-
presentative institutions in India is to decide the franchise ques-
tion, I submit that the materials of knowledge about the subject 
are by no means so slender that the Colonists cannot decide the 
question now and for ever, without the necessity of an Act leaving 
it an open question to be decided hereafter in a Court of Law, 
involving a useless waste of money. 
I am, etc., 
M. K. GANDHI 
The Natal Witness, 17-4-1896 
1 There was some discussion in the Natal Assembly on April 9 whether 
Indians had "representative institutions". 
The Prime Minister's observation 
that they were not possessed of representative institutions "founded on the fran-
chise" was considered inadequate. 
In the draft Bill, the words "Parliamentary 
institutions" were substituted by "elective representative institutions"—words 
used in the Governor's address to the Assembly. 
The second reading of the 
Bill which was to have been on April 22 was 
postponed for a break in order 
that relevant correspondence between the Colonial and Home Governments 
could be made available and assessed by them; vide The Early Phase, pp. 605-6. 
