9. 
INDIAN VEGETARIANS—III 
In the previous article "more hereafter" was promised about 
the cakes. These cakes are generally made of wheat-flour. Wheat 
is first ground in a handmill—a simple contrivance to reduce 
the wheat to powder—not a mill requiring machinery. 
This 
powdered wheat is passed through a sieve with large holes, so 
that the coarsest bran is left out. Indeed, among the poor classes 
it is not passed through the sieve at all. Thus the flour, though 
not the same as that used by the vegetarians here, is far supe-
rior to the ordinary flour that is here used for the much-abused 
white bread. Some clarified butter, i.e., butter boiled and passed 
22 
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI 
through a sieve—sometimes a useless process when the butter is 
quite pure—and then allowed to become cool—say a tea-spoonful 
to a pound of flour—is mixed with the flour, a sufficient quantity 
of water is poured on it, and then it is kneaded with the hands 
until it forms itself into one homogeneous mass. This lump is divi-
ded into small equal parts, each as big as a tangerine. These are 
rolled into thin circular pieces about six inches in diameter with 
a wooden stick made specially for the purpose. Each piece is sepa-
rately and thoroughly baked in a flat dish. It takes from five to 
seven minutes to bake one cake. This cake is eaten while hot with 
butter, and has a very nice flavour. 
It may be, and is, eaten even 
quite cold. What meat is to the ordinary Englishman, the cake 
is to the Indian, be he a vegetarian or a meat-eater, for in India 
a meat-eater does not, in the writer's opinion, regard his meat as 
an absolute necessity, but takes it rather as a side dish to help 
him, so to speak, in eating the cakes. 
Such in outline, and only in outline, is the ordinary food of 
a well-to-do Indian vegetarian. Now a question may be asked, 
"Has not the British Rule effected any change in the habits 
of the Indian people?" So far as the food and drink are con-
cerned "yes", and "no". 
No, because ordinary men and women 
have stuck to their original food and the number of meals. Yes, 
because those who have learnt a little bit of English have picked 
up English ideas here and there, but this change too—whether it 
is for the worse or for the better must be left to the reader to 
judge—is not very perceptible. 
The last-mentioned class have begun to believe in break-fast, 
which usually consists of a cup or two of tea. Now this brings us to 
the question of drink. The drinking of tea and coffee by the so-
called educated Indians, chiefly due to the British Rule, may be 
passed over with the briefest notice. The most that tea and coffee 
can do is to cause a little extra expense, and general debility of 
health when indulged in to excess, but one of the most greatly-felt 
evils of the British Rule is the importation of alcohol—that enemy 
of mankind, that curse of civilization—in some form or another. 
The measure of the evil wrought by this borrowed habit will be 
properly gauged by the reader when he is told that the enemy 
has spread throughout the length and breadth of India, in spite 
of the religious prohibition; for even the touch of a bottle con-
taining alcohol pollutes the Mahommedan, according to his religion, 
and the religion of the Hindu strictly prohibits the use of alco-
hol in any form whatever, and yet, alas! the Government, it seems, 
instead of stopping, are aiding and abetting the spread of alcohol. 
INDIAN VEGETARIANS-IV 
23 
The poor there, as everywhere, are the greatest sufferers. It is 
they who spend what little they earn in buying alcohol instead of 
buying food and other necessaries. It is that wretched poor man 
who has to starve his family, who has to break the sacred trust of 
looking after his children, if any, in order to drink himself into 
misery and premature death. Here be it said to the credit of 
Mr. Caine1, the ex-Member for Barrow, that he, undaunted, is still 
carrying on his admirable crusade against the spread of the evil, 
but what can the energy of one man, however powerful, do against 
the inaction of an apathetic and dormant Government? 
The Vegetarian, 21-2-1891 
