90. 
MEMORIAL TO NATAL LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY 
DURBAN, 
April 27, 1896 
TO 
THE HONOURABLE 
THE 
SPEAKER AND 
MEMBERS 
OF 
THE 
HONOURABLE 
THE 
LEGISLATIVE 
ASSEMBLY 
OF 
NATAL 
IN 
PARLIAMENT ASSEMBLED, PIETERMARITZBURG 
THE 
MEMORIAL 
OF 
THE 
UNDERSIGNED 
INDIANS 
RESIDING 
IN 
THIS 
COLONY 
HUMBLY SHEWETH THAT: 
Your Memorialists as 
representing and on behalf of the 
Indian community in Natal respectfully approach this Honour-
able House with regard to the Franchise Law Amendment Bill 
now before you for consideration. 
Your Memorialists assume that the Bill is meant chiefly, if not 
solely, to affect the Indian community in that it repeals and re-
places the Act 25 of 1894 which was intended to disfranchise the 
Indians in the Colony. 
In the Memorial1 that was presented to this Honourable House 
on behalf of the Indian community on the same subject when 
the Act 25 of 1894 was under consideration, it was contended that 
the Indians did possess elective representative institutions in India. 
The present Bill disfranchises natives of countries, not being 
of European origin, which have not possessed elective represen-
tative institutions in their own native land. 
The position of your Memorialists, therefore, is painfully 
awkward in opposing the present Bill. 
Yet, seeing that the Bill tacitly proposes to deal with the 
Indian franchise, your Memorialists consider it to be their duty 
respectfully to express their views about the Bill and also to show 
further on what grounds they believe that the Indians possess 
elective representative institutions in India. 
In moving the second reading of the "India Councils Act 
(1861) Amendment Bill" in the House of Commons on the 28th 
day of March, 1892, the then Under-Secretary of State for India, 
said :2 
1 This was dated June 28, 1894. 
2 Not reproduced here. For the text of the speech, vide pp. 309-10. 
MEMORIAL TO NATAL LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY 
313 
The Amending Act, besides increasing the number of nomi-
nated members in each Council, gives the power of discussing 
the financial statement every year and the power of "interpella-
tion". It embodies the elective principle. The Legislative Councils have 
from their inception enjoyed the representative character. The 
honourable mover of the second reading, with reference to the 
increase of nominated members, said: 
The object of this addition is very easily stated and will, I think, be 
very easily understood by the House. 
It is simply by expanding the area 
of selection, in which case you are adding to the strength of the repre-
sentative character of the Councils. 
But now these Councils, your Memorialists venture to submit, 
enjoy the representative character "founded on the franchise". 
Speaking on an Amendment by Mr. Schwann, M.P., to the 
Bill to the effect that "no reform of Councils that does not em-
body the elective principle will be satisfactory", Mr. Curzon said: 
I should like to point out to him that our Bill does not necessarily 
exclude some such principle as the method of selection, election or dele-
gation. With the permission of the House, I will read the words of the 
sub-section of Clause I. 
It runs as follows: 
The Governor-General-
in-Council may from time to time on the approval of the Secretary of 
State-in-Council make regulations as to the conditions under which such 
nominations or any of them shall be made by the Governor-General, 
Governors and Lieutenant-Governors, respectively, and prescribe the manner 
in which such regulations shall be carried into effect. . . " 
Lord Kimberley1 has expressed himself about that clause. 
He said: 
I am bound to say that I express my whole satisfaction with regard 
to this elective principle. 
The opinions expressed by Lord Kimberley are shared by the 
Secretary of State under this Act: 
It would be in the power of the Viceroy to invite representative 
bodies in India to elect or select or delegate representatives of those 
bodies of their opinion to be nominated to these Councils and by elective 
measures. 
The Right Honourable Mr. Gladstone, speaking on the same 
subject, after explaining the speeches of the honourable mover 
of the Second Reading of the Bill and its amendment, said: 
1 Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs, 1894-5 
314 
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI 
I think I may fairly say that the speech of the Under-Secretary ap-
pears to me to embody the elective principle in the only sense in which 
we should expect it to be embodied. . . It is evident that the great question 
—and it is one of great and profound interest—before the House is that of 
the introduction of the elective element into the Government of India. 
What I wish is that their first steps shall be of a genuine nature and that 
whatever scope they give to the elective principle shall be real; there is 
no difference of principle. 
I think that the acceptance of the elective 
principle by the honourable gentleman (Mr. Curzon) though guarded was 
not otherwise than a frank acceptance. 
Turning to the Regulations made and published in accor-
dance with the above Act, your Memorialists submit that the 
remarks hereinbefore quoted are fully borne out. 
To take the 
Bombay Legislative Council, for instance, out of the eighteen 
nominated members, eight are elected by, or as it is put in the 
Regulations, "nominated on the recommendation of" the vari-
ous representative bodies which are enfranchised for the purpose 
of Legislative Councils. The Corporation of Bombay (itself an 
elective body), Municipal Corporations other than the Bombay 
Corporation in the Bombay Presidency prescribed by the Gover-
nor-in-Council, District Local Boards prescribed as above, the 
Sardars of the Deccan or other class of large landholders pres-
cribed as above, associations of merchants, tradesmen, etc., pres-
cribed as above, and the Senate of the University of Bombay re-
commend or elect these eight members by a majority of votes or 
in the case of associations not established by law in the manner 
laid down in their rules for carrying resolutions or recording deci-
sions upon questions of business brought before such associations. 
In the Sardars of the Deccan, this Honourable House will 
notice, there are even direct voters for the election of members 
of the Council. 
The regulations for the other Councils are much the same. 
Such is the character of the Legislative Councils in India 
and the political franchise. The difference, therefore, your Memo-
rialists beg respectfully to point out, is not one of kind but of 
degree only. The reason is not because the Indians do not know 
or understand the representative principle. Your Memorialists 
cannot do better than quote again from the speech of the Right 
Honourable Mr. Gladstone, partly quoted above; he thus explain-
ed the reasons for the restrictive character of the elective principle: 
Her Majesty's Government ought to understand that it will be re-
garded as a most grave disappointment if, after all the assurances we 
MEMORIAL TO NATAL LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY 
315 
have received that an attempt will be made to bring into operation this 
powerful engine of Government (i.e., the elective principle), there should 
not be some result such as we anticipate from their action. 
I do not speak 
of its amount, I speak more of its quality. 
In an Asiatic country like 
India, with its ancient civilization, with its institutions so peculiar, with 
such a diversity of races, religions and pursuits, with such an enormous 
extent of country, and such a multitude of human beings as probably 
except in China were never before under a single Government, I can 
understand that there should be difficulties in carrying out what we 
desire to see accomplished. 
But great as the difficulties are the task is a 
noble one, and will require the utmost prudence and care in conducting 
it to a successful consummation. 
All these things induce us to look for-
ward cheerfully to a great future for India, and to expect that a real success 
will attend the genuine application, even though it may be a limited 
one, of the elective principle to the government of that vast and almost 
immeasurable country. 
The opinion of those who are qualified to speak on Indian 
subjects seems to be unanimous as to the representative charac-
ter of the Indian Councils. 
Sir William Wilson Hunter, the greatest living authority on 
Indian subjects, says: 
The representative principle is now being cautiously extended, under 
Lord Cross's Act of 1892, to the Legislative Councils both of the Supreme 
and the Provincial Governments. 
The Times, dealing with the Indian franchise in Natal, says: 
The argument that the Indian in Natal cannot claim higher privi-
leges than he enjoys in India and that he has no franchise whatever 
in India is inconsistent with the facts. 
The Indian has precisely the 
same franchise in India which the Englishman enjoys. 
After dealing with the Municipal franchise the article goes 
on to say: 
A similar principle applies, with the modifications incidental to our 
system of government in India, to what may be called the Higher Elec-
torate. 
The elected members of the Supreme and the Legislative Councils, 
which deal with 221 millions of British subjects are mainly elected by native 
bodies. 
Apart from the official representatives of Government in the 
Supreme and Provincial Legislatures about one-half the members are 
natives. 
It would be wrong to push this analogy too far. 
But it answers 
the argument against allowing British Indian subjects a vote in British 
Colonies on the ground that they have no vote in India. 
So far as 
government by voting exists in India, Englishmen and Indians stand on 
316 
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI 
the same footing and, alike in 
the Municipal, the Provincial and the 
Supreme Councils, the native interests are powerfully represented. 
The Municipal franchise is very broad in India, and almost 
the whole of British India is studded by Municipal Corporations 
and Local Boards. 
Speaking of the class of Indians already on the Voters' Rolls 
in Natal, The Times article, referred to above, says: 
It is precisely this class of men who form the most valued element 
in the municipal and other electorates in India. 
Throughout the 750 
municipalities of India the British and the native voters have equal rights, 
and 9,790 Municipal Commissioners [Councillors] in 
1891 were natives 
as against 839 Europeans. 
The European vote on the Indian Municipal 
Boards was therefore only one to 8 Indian votes, while in the Natal 
Electorate there are 37 European votes to one British Indian. . . . It must 
be remembered that Indian Municipalities administer a population of 15 
millions and an expenditure of 50 million rupees. 
As to the acquaintance of the Indian with the nature and 
responsibilities of representative institutions, the same article says: 
There is probably no other country in the world in which repre-
sentative institutions have penetrated so deeply into the life of the people. 
Every caste, every trade, every village in India had for ages its council 
of five which practically legislated for and conducted the administration 
of the little community which it represented. 
Until the introduction 
of the Parish Councils' Act last year, there was no such rural system of 
self-administration even in England. 
Mr. Schwann, M.P., on the same subject says: 
Do not suppose that the question of election is a new one in India. 
. . . There is no question which is more specially Indian than the ques-
tion of election. 
Most of our civilization has come from India. 
And 
there is not the slightest doubt that we ourselves are practising a develop-
ment of the Eastern principle of election. 
Under such circumstances the Indian community whom the 
Bill is intended to affect find it most difficult to understand it. 
Your Memorialists submit that the vagueness and ambiguity 
of the Bill are very undesirable and fair neither to the European 
community nor the Indian. They leave both in a state of suspense 
which is painful to the latter. 
Your Memorialists respectfully draw 
the attention of this 
Honourable House to the fact that according to the present 
Voters' Roll, there is one Indian to every 38 Europeans, and that 
the Indian voters belong to the most respectable element in that 
MEMORIAL TO NATAL LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY 
317 
community and are residents of long standing with large stakes 
in the Colony. 
It is said, however, that the present List is no guide to what 
proportions the Indian vote may assume in future. But the fact 
that, during the two years that the disfranchisement of the Indian 
community has been threatened, no more Indians have had their 
names placed on the Voters' Roll, in your Memorialists' humble 
opinion, sufficiently disposes of the argument. 
The truth is, and your Memorialists venture to speak from 
personal experience, there are not very many Indians in the 
Colony who have got the legal property qualification, low as it is. 
Your Memorialists respectfully submit that the Bill under 
discussion is open to more objections than one. In your Memo-
rialists' humble opinion, it introduces the colour distinction in a 
most invidious manner. For, while natives of other countries not 
enjoying elective representative 
institutions 
may not 
become 
voters, natives of the States of Europe, even though they may not 
enjoy such institutions in the countries they come from, may be-
come voters under the General Franchise Law of the Colony. 
It would make the sons of non-European women of question-
able reputation eligible as voters so long as the father is a Euro-
pean, while it would prevent the son of a European lady of noble 
birth, should she choose to marry a nobleman belonging to a non-
European race, from becoming a voter under the General Fran-
chise Law of the Colony. 
Assuming that the Indians come under the scope of the Bill, 
the method by which they may get themselves placed on the 
Voters' Roll will be a source of constant irritation to the Indian 
community, and may give rise to a system of favouritism and cause 
serious dissensions among the members of the Indian community. 
The Bill is moreover calculated to involve the Indian com-
munity in endless litigation in order to enable them to vindicate 
their rights, which your Memorialists think, are capable of defini-
tion without any recourse to the law-courts of the Colony. 
Above all, it will transfer the agitation from the hands of the 
Europeans, who now wish to see the Indians disfranchised, into 
those of the Indian community. And the agitation, your Memo-
rialists fear, has to be perpetual. 
It is most humbly submitted that such a state of things is very 
undesirable in the interests of all the communities inhabiting this 
Colony. 
Your Memorialists, after a careful investigation for over a 
year, have ventured to come to the conclusion that the fear about 
318 
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI 
the Indian vote swamping the European is absolutely imaginary, 
and, therefore, fervently pray and venture to hope that this 
Honourable House, before assenting to any Bill specially restrictive 
of the Indian vote, or directly or indirectly introducing any colour 
distinction, would institute an inquiry into the real state of 
affairs which would show how many resident Indians there are in 
this Colony who possess the legal property qualification necessary 
for being placed on the Voters' Roll. 
And for this act of justice and mercy, your Memorialists, as 
in duty bound, shall for ever pray, etc., etc.1 
ABDUL CAREEM HAJEE ADAM 
AND OTHERS 
From a photostat of a printed copy: S.N. 980 
