94. 
MEMORIAL TO J. CHAMBERLAIN 
DURBAN, 
May 22, 1896 
TO 
THE RIGHT HONOURABLE JOSEPH CHAMBERLAIN, 
HER MAJESTY'S PRINCIPAL SECRETARY 
OF STATE FOR THE 
COLONIES, LONDON 
THE MEMORIAL OF THE UNDERSIGNED INDIAN BRITISH SUBJECTS 
RESIDING IN THE COLONY OF NATAL 
HUMBLY SHEWETH THAT: 
Your Memorialists hereby respectfully beg to lay before Your 
Honour the following for your consideration with regard to the 
Franchise Law Amendment Bill introduced by the Natal Govern-
ment in the Natal Legislative Assembly, which was read a third 
time on the 13th day of May, 1896, with certain amendments. 
The following is the text of the Bill as it appeared in the 
Natal Government Gazette dated the 3rd March, 1896: 
To amend the Law relating to the Franchise: 
Whereas it is expedient to amend the law relating to the Franchise, 
Be it therefore enacted by the Queen's Most Excellent Majesty, by and 
with the advice and consent of the Legislative Council and Legislative 
Assembly of Natal, as follows: 
1. 
Act No. 25, 1894, shall be and the same is hereby repealed. 
2. 
Save those who come under the operation of Section 3 of this 
Act, no persons shall be qualified to have their names inserted in any List 
of Electors or in any Voters' Roll, or to vote as Electors within the mean-
ing of Section 22 of the Constitution Act of 1893, or of any law relating 
to the election of members of the Legislative Assembly, who (not being 
of European origin) are Natives, or descendants in the male line of Natives 
of countries which have not hitherto possessed elective representative institutions, 
unless they shall first obtain an order from the Governor-in-Council 
exempting them from the operation of this Act. 
3. The provisions of Section 2 of this Act shall not apply to per-
sons of the class mentioned in that Section whose names are rightly con-
tained in any Voters' Roll in force at the date of the promulgation of 
this Act, and who are otherwise competent and qualified as electors. 
The Act repealed by Section I of the above Bill is as fol-
lows: 
I-21 
322 
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI 
Whereas it is expedient to amend the Law relating to the Fran-
chise and to except therefrom persons belonging to Asiatic races not ac-
customed to the exercise of Franchise rights under parliamentary institutions, 
Be it therefore enacted by the Queen's Most Excellent Majesty, by 
and with the advice and consent of the Legislative Council and Legislative 
Assembly of Natal, as follows: 
1. Save as in Section 2 of this Act excepted, persons of Asiatic ex-
traction shall not be qualified to have their names inserted in any List 
of Electors or in any Voters' Roll, or to vote as Electors within the mean-
ing of Section 22 of the Constitution Act of 1893, or of any law relating 
to the election of members of the Legislative Assembly. 
2. 
The provisions of Section 1 of this Act shall not apply to persons 
of the class mentioned in that Section whose names are rightly contained 
in any Voters' Roll in force at the date of the promulgation of this Act, 
and who are otherwise competent and qualified as electors. 
3. 
This Act shall not come into operation unless and until the 
Governor notifies by Proclamation in the Natal Government Gazette that 
it is Her Majesty's pleasure not to disallow the same, and thereafter it 
shall come into operation upon such day as the Governor shall notify 
by the same or any other Proclamation. 
A Memorial1 setting forth the views of the Indian community 
in reference to the Bill under discussion was presented to the 
Legislative Assembly on the 28th day of April, 1896. A copy 
thereof is hereto annexed marked 'A'. 
On the 6th day of May, 1896, the Bill was read a second 
time. During the course of his speech, the Prime Minister, the 
Honourable Sir John Robinson, said that the Ministers had taken 
steps to ascertain whether you would be agreeable to an insertion 
in the aforesaid Bill of the words "founded on the franchise" after 
"elective representative institutions", and that you were so agree-
able. 
Thereupon, on the 7th day of May, 1896, your Memoria-
lists sent to Your Honour a cablegram to the following effect: 
The Indian community earnestly request you not to accept Natal 
Franchise 
Bill or Ministerial alteration thereof proposed last night; 
memorial preparing. 
In Committee, however, the Honourable Sir John Robinson 
announced on the 11th day of May, 1896, that Your Honour had 
agreed to a further addition, viz., 'Parliamentary' between 'the' 
and 'franchise'. 
1 Vide "Memorial to Natal Legislative Assembly", 27-4-1896. 
MEMORIAL TO J. 
CHAMBERLAIN 
323 
The Bill, therefore, as to representative institutions would now 
read "elective representative institutions founded on 
the Parlia-
mentary franchise". 
Your Memorialists humbly venture to think that the present 
Bill, so far as the Indian community and, indeed, all the com-
munities are concerned, is worse than the Act it repeals. 
Your Memorialists, therefore, feel aggrieved that you have 
been pleased to approve of the Bill, but they trust that the facts 
and arguments placed before you hereinbelow are such as would 
induce you to reconsider your views. 
Your Memorialists have all along contended that the Indians 
did enjoy "elective representative institutions" in India. 
But the 
papers published in connection with the franchise question seem 
to show that you do not think that the Indians possess such 
institutions. 
With the greatest deference to Your Honour's view, 
your Memorialists crave leave to draw your attention to the 
extracts quoted in the annexure 'A' upholding the opposite view. 
Your approval of the present Bill, coupled with the view held 
by Your Honour regarding "elective representative institutions" in 
India, places the Indian community in Natal in a very painful 
and awkward position. 
Your Memorialists venture to submit: 
1. That no legislation restrictive of the Indian franchise in 
Natal is necessary. 
2. That, if there be any doubt with regard to this point, an 
enquiry should be first instituted as to whether such a necessity 
does exist. 
3. That, assuming that the necessity exists, the present Bill 
is not calculated to meet the difficulty in a straightforward and 
open manner. 
4. That, if Her Majesty's Government are absolutely satisfied 
that the necessity exists and that no Bill could be conceived that 
would solve the difficulty without a resort to class legislation, it is 
better that in any Franchise Bill the Indians should be specially 
named. 
5. That the present Bill is likely to give rise to endless liti-
gation owing to its ambiguity and vagueness. 
6. That it would involve the Indian community in expenses 
almost beyond their control. 
7. That assuming the Bill affects the Indian community, the 
method provided in the Bill whereby any member thereof may 
be exempted from its operation is, your Memorialists respectfully 
324 
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI 
submit, arbitrary, unfair, and likely to create dissensions among 
the members of the Indian community. 
8. That the Bill, like the Act repealed, makes an invidious 
distinction between Europeans and others. 
Your Memorialists humbly submit that the present condition 
of the Voters' List in Natal renders it absolutely unnecessary to 
embark on any legislation to restrict the Indian franchise. 
There 
seems to be needless hurry about passing a measure that affects 
a large portion of Her Majesty's subjects. It is admitted that as 
against 9,309 European voters there are only 251 Indian voters; 
201 are either traders or clerks, assistants, schoolmasters, etc., 
and 50 are gardeners and others, and that most of these voters 
are settlers of long standing. 
These figures, your Memorialists 
submit, do not warrant any restrictive legislation. 
The Bill under 
discussion is intended to deal with a remote and probable and 
possible danger. 
A danger is really assumed which does not 
exist. 
His Honour, Sir John Robinson, in moving the second 
reading of the Bill, based his fears about the danger of the 
European vote being swamped 
by the Indian vote on three 
grounds, viz.: 
1. The fact that the petition to Her Majesty's Government in 
connection with the Franchise Act, repealed by the present Bill, 
was signed by nearly 9,000 Indians. 
2. The approaching general election in the Colony. 
3. The existence of the Natal Indian Congress. 
As to the first ground, even in the correspondence on the 
subject, the Natal Government have argued that the 9,000 sig-
natories wanted to be placed on the Voters' Roll. 
The first para-
graph of that petition is a sufficient answer to the argument. The 
Petitioners, your Memorialists humbly submit, never contended for 
any such thing. 
They certainly protested against the wholesale 
disfranchisement 
of the Indians. 
Your Memorialists humbly 
venture to think that every Indian, whether he had the property 
qualifications or not, was very materially affected by that Bill. 
Your Memorialists admit that the fact shows a degree of organ-
izing power among the Indians, alluded to by the hon. mover, 
but your Memorialists respectfully contend that no matter how 
powerful the organizing power might be, it cannot overcome the 
natural barriers. 
Out of the 9,000 signatories, not a hundred, 
besides those who were already on the Voters' Roll, possessed the 
legal property qualifications. 
With regard to the second ground, the hon. mover said: 
MEMORIAL TO J. CHAMBERLAIN 
325 
He might remind members that before long there must be a general 
election, and they would have to consider upon what register that general 
election was to take place. 
It was not for him to say how many Indian 
electors might or might not be on the ensuing electoral roll, but the 
Government thought it was high time that no further delay should take 
place in seizing this question by the throat and settling it once for all, 
without further delay. 
Your Memorialists submit, with all due respect to the hon. 
mover, that all these fears have no foundation in fact. 
According 
to the Report of the Protector of Immigrants for 1895, out of 46,343 
Indians in the Colony, only 30,303 are free Indians. 
To that may 
be added the trading Indian population of, say, 5,000. 
Thus there 
are only 35,000 Indians, as against over 45,000 Europeans, who 
can at all compete with the latter. 
The 16,000 indentured Indians, 
it is easy to see, never can, while they are under indenture. But 
a large majority of the 30,303 are only a stage higher than the 
indentured Indians. 
And your Memorialists venture to say from 
personal experience that there are in this Colony thousands of 
Indians who do not pay £10 per year in rents. 
In fact, there 
are thousands who have to drag on their existence on that amount. 
Where then, your Memorialists ask, is the fear of the Indians 
swamping the Voters' List next year? 
The disfranchisement has been threatened for the last two 
years. 
The Electoral Roll has twice undergone revision since. 
The Indians had every incentive to add to the Indian vote, lest 
many may be shut out. 
And yet there has been not a single 
addition to the Voters' List from the Indian community. 
But the hon. mover went on to say: 
Members might not be aware that there was in this country a 
body, a very powerful body in its way, a very united body, though prac-
tically a secret body—he meant the Indian Congress. 
That was a body 
which possessed large funds, it was a body presided over by very active 
and very able men, and it was a body the avowed object of which was 
to exercise strong political power in the affairs of the Colony. 
Your Memorialists venture to say that this estimate of the 
Congress is not justified by facts. The charge of secrecy, as would 
appear from the correspondence between the Honourable the 
Prime Minister of Natal and the Honorary Secretary of the 
Congress, was made under an erroneous impression (Appendices 
B,C,D1). 
A statement with regard to the matter also was made 
1 Vide "Letter to Prime Minister", 14-5-1896, and "Letter to C. Bird", 
18-5-1896. 
326 
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI 
by him in the Legislative Assembly on the 20th instant. 
Nor has the Congress in any shape or form intended or at-
tempted to "exercise strong political power". 
The following are 
the objects of the Congress, which were published in almost every 
paper in South Africa last year: 
" 1. To bring about a better understanding and promote 
friendliness between the Europeans and the Indians residing in 
the Colony. 
"2. To spread information about India and the Indians by 
writing to newspapers, publishing pamphlets, lecturing, etc. 
"3. To educate the Indians, especially [ those] born in the 
Colony, about Indian History, and induce them to study Indian 
subjects. 
"4. To ascertain the various grievances the Indians are labour-
ing under and to agitate by resorting to all constitutional methods 
for removing them. 
"5. To enquire into the condition of the indentured Indians 
and to help them out of special hardships. 
"6. To help the poor and the needy in all reasonable ways. 
"7. And generally to do everything that would tend to put 
the Indians on a better footing morally, socially, intellectually, 
and politically." 
It would thus appear that the object of the Congress is to 
resist degradation, not to gain political power. 
As to funds, the 
Congress has a property worth £1,080 and a balance of £148 
7s 8d in the Bank, at the time of writing this. These funds have 
to be used in charity, printing memorials and working expenses. 
In your Memorialists' humble opinion they are hardly sufficient 
to fulfil the objects of the Congress. 
The educational work is 
greatly hampered owing to want of funds. 
Your Memorialists, 
therefore, venture to submit that the danger which the present 
Bill is intended to guard against does not exist at all. 
Your Memorialists, however, do not request Her Majesty's 
Government to accept the above facts as correct on their ipse 
dixit. If there is any doubt about any of them—and the most 
important fact is that there are thousands who do not possess the 
necessary property qualifications for becoming voters—then the 
proper course, your Memorialists submit, is to enquire about 
them, particularly to enquire how many Indians there are in the 
Colony who possess immovable property of the value of £50 or 
who pay a yearly rent of £10. To prepare such a return would 
neither cost much time nor much money, and would be a very 
material help towards a satisfactory solution of the franchise ques-
MEMORIAL TO J. CHAMBERLAIN 
327 
tion. The hot haste to pass some measure is, in your Memorialists' 
humble opinion, detrimental to the best interests of the Colony 
as a whole. 
Your Memorialists, so far as they, as representatives 
of the Indian community, are concerned and speaking autho-
ritatively for the organization of which they have the honour to 
be members, hereby beg to assure Her Majesty's Government that 
they have no intention to endeavour to place a single Indian 
voter on the Voters' List for the general election next year. 
The Government organ, dealing with the present Bill in a 
presumably inspired article, supports the view that the danger 
is "a chimerical one". 
It says: 
Moreover, we feel sure that should the Asiatic vote ever endanger 
the stability of European rule in this Colony, the Imperial Government 
will find ways and means out of such a difficulty. 
The new Bill imposes 
certain limitations on the acquirement of the franchise by all who are 
not of European origin, and as now even with the franchise open to British 
subjects of all races and classes, except the Natives under Native law, there 
are only some 250 Indians on the Voters' Roll out of a total of 9,560 
registered voters, or in the proportion of one Indian voter to every 38 
Europeans in possession of the franchise, we think the new Bill will fully 
meet the requirements of the case for very many long years at all events, 
if not for all time. 
In South Carolina, for instance, the Negroes over 21 
years old number 132,949, while the whites over 21 only number 102,567, 
yet the whites have retained the dominant power, although in the mino-
rity. 
The fact of the matter is that apart from numbers altogether the 
superior race will always hold the reins of Government. 
We are inclined 
to the belief, therefore, that the danger of the Indian vote swamping the European 
is a chimerical one. 
From what we know of the matter, we are inclined 
to think that it will be held that India is a country possessing "elective 
representative institutions". 
In fact, the argument so often advanced that 
the Indian is unacquainted with their nature and responsibilities is really 
wide of the mark, as in India there are some 750 municipalities in which 
British and native voters have equal rights, and in 1891, there were 9,790 
native municipal commissioners [councillors] as against 839 Europeans. 
. . . Even assuming, however, that natives of India 
will be held as 
coming from a country possessing "elective representative institutions", 
we do not consider that the danger of being swamped is at all a likely one, as 
past experience has proved that the class of Indians coming here, as a rule, do not 
concern themselves about the franchise, 
and further, the majority of them do not 
even possess the small property qualification required. 
In addition to all this, 
the obligations of the Empire of which we form a part do not permit 
of Indians as Indians being excluded from the exercise of such a privi-
lege as the franchise. 
So far as we are concerned, therefore, such an 
328 
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI 
attitude is a non possumus and may, therefore, be dropped. 
Should the 
restrictions of the new law not prevent the introduction of an undesirable 
element onto the Voters' Roll, there is nothing at all to prevent us rais-
ing the franchise qualification. 
At present it is very low. 
The property 
qualification could, therefore, be easily increased, even doubled, and an 
educational test imposed which, while it would not remove a single 
European from the Voters' Roll, would have a sweeping effect on Indian 
voters. 
The number of the latter possessing immovable property of the 
value of, say, £100 or paying a rent of £20 per annum and able to read 
and write English must be exceedingly small, and should this fail, there 
would be nothing to hinder us from adopting the Mississippi plan, or a 
modification of it to suit the circumstances 
(5th March, 1896). 
It is clear, therefore, that according to the Government 
organ the present property qualifications are sufficiently high to 
prevent any undue influx of Indian voters on the Roll, and that 
the only object of the present Bill is to harass the Indian com-
munity—to land them in expensive litigation. 
According to the Mauritius Almanac for 1895, the population of 
that island in 1894 was 259,224 Indians as against 106,995 persons 
under the heading 'general population'. 
The franchise quali-
fication there is as follows: 
Every male person shall be entitled to be registered in any year 
as a voter for any electoral district and, when registered, to vote at the 
election of a member of the Council for such district who is qualified as 
follows, that is to say: 
1. That he has attained the age of twenty-one years. 
2. 
Is under no legal incapacity. 
3. 
Is a British subject by birth or naturalization. 
4. Has resided in the Colony for three years at least previous to the 
date of registration and possesses some one of the following qualifications: 
(a) 
Is on the 1st day of January in each year, and has, during 
the preceding six calendar months, been the owner of immovable property 
within such district of the annual value of Rs. 300 or the monthly value 
of Rs. 25 above all charges and encumbrances affecting the same. 
(b) 
Is at the date of registration paying, and has for the six calen-
dar months previous to the 1st day of January in such year paid, rent 
in respect of immovable property situate within such district at the rate 
of at least Rs. 25 per month. 
(c) 
Has for three calendar months previous to the 1st of January in 
such year resided, or had his principal place of business or employment 
within such district, and is the owner of movable property within the 
Colony of the value of at least Rs. 3,000. 
MEMORIAL TO J. CHAMBERLAIN 
329 
(d) 
Is the husband of a wife, or the eldest son of a widow, possess-
ing any one of the above qualifications. 
(e) 
Has for 
three calendar months previous to the 1st day of 
January in such year resided, or had his principal place of business or 
employment within such district, and is in receipt of a yearly salary of 
at least Rs. 600, or a monthly salary of at least Rs. 50. 
(f) 
Has for three calendar months previous to the 1st of January 
in such year resided, or has his principal place of business or employment 
within such district, and pays licence duty to the amount of at least 
Rs. 50 per annum. 
Provided—
1. That no person shall be registered as a voter, or be entitled to 
vote for the election of a member of the Council who has been convicted 
of perjury in any Court in our Dominions or who has been sentenced by 
any such Court to death, or penal servitude, or imprisonment with hard 
labour, or for a term exceeding twelve months, and has not either suffered 
the punishment to which he was sentenced or such other punishment 
as by competent authority may have been substituted for the same or re-
ceived a free pardon from us. 
2. 
That no person shall be registered as a voter in any year who 
has, within twelve calendar months immediately preceding the first day 
of January in that year, received any relief from public or parochial funds. 
3. That no person shall be registered as a voter in any year unless 
he shall, in the presence of the registering officer or of a magistrate, with 
his own hand subscribe his name to his claim to be registered and write 
thereon the date of such subscription and the qualification in respect of 
which he claims to be registered. 
4. That no person claiming to be registered in the district in which 
he resides in respect of any of the qualifications (c), (d), (e) and (f), shall 
be registered in respect of the same qualification in the district in which 
he has his principal place of business or employment or vice versa. 
With these qualifications there is evidently no trouble in 
Mauritius, although the Indian population is twice as large as 
the general population, and the Indians in Mauritius belong to 
the same class as the Indians in Natal. 
Only, there they are far 
more prosperous than their Natal brethren. 
Assuming, however, that the necessity to deal with the Indian 
franchise does exist, your Memorialists respectfully beg to say that 
the present Bill is not calculated to meet it in a straightforward 
and open manner. 
The 
Honourable and 
learned 
Attorney-
General of Natal, referring to a suggestion to slightly alter the 
existing law in course of the debate on the Second Reading, is 
reported to have said: 
330 
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI 
The reason why he refused to do this was because it was apparently 
doing it by a side-wind and quietly, and the Government intended to do 
it in the full light of day. 
It is difficult to conceive a better mode of doing a thing by 
a "side-wind and quietly" than that of passing the present Bill, 
which leaves everybody in the dark. 
The Natal Advertiser of the 
8th May, 1896, says: 
... What is the present Bill if not a side-wind? 
Its whole object 
is 
to endeavour quietly and by a side wind to effect that which the 
measure of last session failed to accomplish. 
Mr. Escombe admitted that 
the measure was brutally blunt and to this he rightly ascribed its failure 
to obtain acceptance by the Imperial Government. 
He further admitted 
that the present Bill has precisely the same object in view as the "brutal" 
Bill, only it does not state its object honestly and straightforwardly; in 
other words, it seeks quietly and by a side-wind to reach the goal appa-
rently unattainable by plain sailing. 
If Her Majesty's Government are convinced that 
a 
real 
necessity exists for legislation restricting the Indian franchise in 
Natal, and if Her Majesty's Government are satisfied that the 
question cannot be dealt with but by class legislation, and if Her 
Majesty's Government further accept the Colonial view that Indian 
British subjects, in spite of the gracious Proclamation of 1858, may 
be treated on a different footing from that on which the European 
British subjects are treated, then, your Memorialists submit that 
it would be infinitely better and more satisfactory to exclude the 
Indians by name from any rights and privileges that they, in 
the opinion of Her Majesty's Government, should not be allowed 
to enjoy, than that by ambiguous legislation the door should be 
left open for litigation and trouble. 
That the Bill, if assented to, would give rise to endless liti-
gation owing to its ambiguity is an admitted fact. 
It is admittedly 
also of the first importance that the question of the Indian fran-
chise should be "settled once for all", to quote the words of the 
Honourable the Prime Minister of Natal. And yet, in the opinion 
of the majority of the leaders of opinion in Natal, the Bill will 
not settle the question once for all. 
Mr. Binns, the leader of the Opposition in the Natal Assembly, 
after quoting chapter and verse to show that the Indians in India 
did possess elective representative institutions, founded on the 
Parliamentary franchise, is reported to have said this: 
He hoped he had shown clearly that on that ground this Bill was 
wrong. 
There were representative institutions and the elective principle 
MEMORIAL TO J. CHAMBERLAIN 
331 
was acknowledged in India. They had a Parliamentary franchise and there 
was an enormous municipal franchise which affected local government, and 
if this was the case, what was the use of their passing this Bill? 
The 
facts he had stated to the Assembly were taken from the best authorities 
he could find and they proved most conclusively that these institutions did 
exist. 
There was no doubt on one point, that if a Bill of this kind 
passed into law it would lead them into endless litigation, difficulties, and trouble. 
The Bill was not sufficiently clear or definite. 
They wanted something more 
clear and definite. 
He wanted to see this question settled and he would 
do all he could to assist at a settlement. 
But he thought this Bill 
was framed on wrong lines, contained a fact that was not correct, 
and it would 
lead them into endless litigation, difficulty, and trouble. 
It would be impossi-
ble for him to vote for the second reading of this Bill. 
Mr. Bale, a leading member of the Assembly and a leading 
lawyer in Natal, agreeing with Mr. Binns's views, opposed as he is 
to the Indians retaining the franchise right under the general law of 
the Colony, thus feelingly appealed to the House, as well on behalf 
of the Indians as for the Colony generally, not to pass the Bill: 
It would give rise to litigation and produce a feeling of hostility 
and create 
a ferment amongst the Indians themselves. It would also have the further effect 
of inducing appeals to the Privy Council and would prejudice the elec-
tion of members to this House. 
Having regard 
to the great issues 
involved in this measure he hoped the second reading of this Bill would 
not be carried. 
The Natal Witness of the 8th May thus sums up the situation: 
Our warning that, if the Bill passes into law as it stands, the Colony 
will be involved in serious litigation, had the support of Mr. Binns and 
Mr. Bale, and Mr. Smythe's half loaf, which is better than nothing, would 
be dearly purchased at that price. 
What leads us to think the Bill has not 
been considered by the legal advisers of the Crown are the exceedingly 
delicate questions which it raises and which will undoubtedly be fought 
out unless the wording be altered so as not to leave the possibility of a 
resort to law. 
Amongst these questions are the following: Can a Colony 
make laws which contravene the Naturalization Law of England? Are 
British Indians British subjects or not? 
In other words the Bill raises the 
whole question of the position of the British Indians in the Empire. Can special 
laws be passed in Natal, since the issue of the Proclamation of 1858, [to] 
take away any part of the privileges conferred by that document? 
After deploring the ambiguity and vagueness of the Bill, The 
Natal Advertiser, in its leader of the 8th May, says: 
The truth of the position is [that] each line of the present Bill is an 
ambuscade of disputes, which will all come out in the open some day, 
332 
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI 
to perpetuate for years, and probably with increased bitterness, the struggle 
between the Indians and the Europeans in this Colony with regard to the 
vote. 
Your Memorialists appeal to Her Majesty's Government to 
save the Indian community, if not the whole Colony, from such 
a dismal outlook—from perpetual agitation— and all this to avoid 
a danger that does not exist. 
That the expenses of such a struggle to the Indian community 
must be beyond their control needs no argument to prove. 
The 
whole struggle is unequal. 
Now, assuming further, that the highest legal tribunal has 
recorded its opinion that the Indians do not possess "elective 
representative institutions founded on the Parliamentary franchise", 
the method provided in the Bill whereby the Indians may be 
placed on the Voters' Roll is, in your Memorialists' humble 
opinion, in every way unsatisfactory. 
The disapproval of that portion of the Bill which confers the 
power on the Governor is very emphatic on the part of the 
Europeans also. 
The Natal Witness, in dealing with that branch 
of the subject, says: 
.. It attacks great constitutional principles, and further introduces 
into the working of representative institutions in Natal what may be term-
ed an unknown quantity—that is to say, the effect which the third clause, 
providing for an electorate of six to choose fit and proper Asiatics for 
the Voters' Roll, will have upon them .... The Ministry appeared to 
have caught on to the idea (i.e., of indirect election), but in making 
themselves and the Governor an indirect electorate, they are not only 
doing what is decidedly preposterous but highly improper. 
Reverting to the same question again, it says: 
The Assembly has not gained in public estimation by passing a Bill 
which most of the leading members are distrustful of, which they can see 
is a compromise and a compromise which may prove quite ineffectual 
and which, as we pointed out when it was first published, is a most 
dangerous invasion of the privileges of the Assembly as well as an attack 
upon constitutional principles which it might have been assumed that 
every member would have held himself to be under a solemn obligation to 
maintain unimpaired. 
There was no need to remind some of the mem-
bers of the last objection. 
Mr. Bale said that the Franchise ought not 
to be vested in the Governor and Ministry, being a power which ought 
to be vested in the people alone, to be exercised of course by their repre-
sentatives .... But what the Press is concerned about is not the present 
Parliament but all future ones. . . . When a great constitutional principle 
MEMORIAL TO  J. 
CHAMBERLAIN 
333 
is once broken through, however slightly it may be, there is the im-
minent risk of the breach being widened by a Government greedy of 
power. 
That is the objection from the European point of view. Your 
Memorialists, while agreeing with that view, have a yet more 
formidable 
objection 
to 
the principle of the 
clause. 
It is 
not so much the number of Indian voters that the Indian com-
munity wish to see on the Voters' Roll as the vindication of their 
rights and privileges as British subjects and the equal status with 
European British subjects that is assured to the British Indians 
by Her Most Gracious Majesty the Queen Empress on more 
occasions than one, and that has been specially assured to the 
Indian community in Natal by Her Majesty's Government in a 
special despatch by the Right Honourable the late Principal Secre-
tary of State for the Colonies. If other British subjects having 
certain qualifications can claim the franchise as of right, why, your 
Memorialists humbly ask, should not the Indian British subjects? 
The method is cumbrous and will tend to keep up the fran-
chise agitation for ever. It would, moreover, transfer the agita-
tion from the Europeans to the Indians. 
The speeches in the 
Assembly on the second reading show that the power will be 
exercised very sparingly, if at all, by the Governor-in-Council. 
It is calculated to create dissensions among the Indian com-
munity, for the applicant who is rejected may resent the favour 
granted to a brother applicant if the one considers himself as good 
as the other. 
Education, intelligence, and stake, are mentioned in Your 
Honour's despatch relating to the franchise question as entitling 
the Indians to the franchise. 
Your Memorialists submit that if a 
certain amount of education, intelligence or stake is to be suffi-
cient to qualify an Indian to become a voter in the Colony, then 
such a test could be introduced instead of leaving the power in 
the hands of the Governor-in-Council. Hereon, your Memorialists 
beg to draw your attention to a portion of the leading article in 
The Natal Mercury hereinbefore quoted. If the necessary qualifica-
tions for those coming under the operation of that Bill were stated, 
it would do away with the contentious character of that part of 
the Bill, and those coming under its operation will then know 
exactly what qualifications would entitle them to a vote. 
The 
position is well summed up in The Natal Advertiser of the 8th May: 
A still further proof of the duplicity of the present Bill lies in its provi-
sion that the Governor-in-Council shall have the power to place certain 
334 
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI 
Indians on the Voters' Roll. 
This clause is obviously inserted with the 
idea of leading the Imperial Government to suppose that this power of 
exemption would occasionally be used—sparingly perhaps, but still used. 
Yet the Attorney-General declared that "the power for inclusion given in 
such circumstances under the present Bill could not, however, he wished 
to point out, be attained, except through the Governor-in-Council. Every 
section of the community had begun to realize what the true meaning 
was of the responsibility of Ministers and knew quite well that no Mini-
sters could hold office for fourteen days if they took upon themselves the 
responsibility of watering the constituencies by the introduction of Indian 
electors." Further on he said, "There would be no other voice throughout 
South Africa than that the electoral rolls of the country should be ab-
solutely confined to persons of the European race. 
That was the start-
ing point from which they began and the goal they had in view all 
along." . . . If these ministerial declarations mean anything, it is that 
this Government have no intention to exercise their right of exemption. 
Then why is it placed on the Bill? 
Is there not at least an appearance 
of dissembling, or utilizing a side-wind, if the phrase is more expressive, 
in inserting a provision in a measure, which its framers declare in sub-
mitting it for adoption, they mean to treat as a dead letter? 
It would be hardly pleasant for a wealthy Indian merchant 
to have to apply for a permit to be exempted from the opera-
tion of the Bill and also to risk the rejection of his application. 
It is difficult to understand why Europeans, not coming from 
countries which have not hitherto possessed elective representative 
institutions founded on the Parliamentary franchise, should exercise 
the right of voting, while the non-Europeans similarly placed 
cannot under the general law of the Colony. 
The present Bill, according to the view of the Government, 
is an experimental measure. "If", said the honourable and learn-
ed Attorney-General on the second reading, "contrary to their 
belief, and their firm belief, the Bill should fall short of what 
was intended, then there never would be rest in the Colony," etc. 
The Bill, therefore, is not finite. 
Under such circumstances, your 
Memorialists submit that unless all the resources, without resort 
to class legislation, are tried and have failed (i.e., assuming that 
there is a danger of the Indian vote swamping the European), a 
Bill like the present one should not be passed. 
Your Memorialists 
venture to submit that this is not a question that affects a mere 
handful of Her Majesty's subjects, but it affects 300,000,000 of Her 
Majesty's loyal subjects. 
The question is not how many or what 
Indians shall have the vote, but the question, your Memorialists 
humbly submit, is what status the British Indians shall occupy 
MEMORIAL TO J. CHAMBERLAIN 
335 
outside India and in the Colonies and allied States. 
May a res-
pectable Indian venture out of India in pursuit of trade or other 
enterprise and hope to have any status? 
The Indian com-
munity do not want to shape the political destiny of South Africa, 
but they may be allowed to carry on their peaceful avocations 
quietly without any degrading conditions being imposed upon 
them. 
Your Memorialists, therefore, submit that if there is the 
slightest danger of the Indian vote preponderating, a simple edu-
cational test may be imposed on all alike, either with or without 
an increase in property qualifications. 
That would, in the opinion 
of the Government organ also, effectually remove all fear. 
And 
if such a test failed, a more severe test may be imposed, which 
would tell against the Indians without materially affecting the 
European vote. If nothing short of a total exclusion of the 
Indians from the franchise would be acceptable to the Natal 
Government, and if Her Majesty's Government are inclined to 
favour such a demand, then your Memorialists submit that nothing 
short of specific exclusion of the Indians by name would satis-
factorily meet the difficulty. 
Your Memorialists, however, beg to draw your attention to 
the fact that the European Colonists as a body make no such 
demand. 
They seem to be absolutely indifferent. 
The Natal 
Advertiser thus rebukes the indifference: 
Perhaps the manner in which this all-important subject has been 
treated by Parliament also brings out a fourth point—the indifference of 
the Colony to 
its own politics. 
It would be highly interesting to dis-
cover, if such could be done, how many of the Colonists have taken the 
trouble even to read the Bill in question. 
Perhaps the proportion who 
have not read it would be a striking one. 
The general unconcern of 
Colonists in this matter is demonstrated by the fact that meetings have 
not been held in every centre—not to say every nook and corner—of the 
Colony for its ventilation, and to formulate a demand that Parliament 
should only pass such a Bill as would render abortive all further contro-
versy over the subject. 
Had the Colony been fully alive to the real 
gravity of the issue, the columns of the newspapers would also have teem-
ed with a serious and intelligent correspondence on the question. 
Neither 
of these things, however, has happened. 
As a consequence, the Govern-
ment have been able to get through a measure supposed to effectually 
deal with the matter, but which in reality puts it in a far worse and 
dangerous position than ever it was before. 
It would appear from the extracts quoted above that the 
present Bill satisfies neither party. 
With the utmost deference to 
336 
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI 
the Natal Ministry and to both the Legislative bodies here, your 
Memorialists submit that the fact that the Bill has been accepted 
by them does not signify much. 
The very members who re-
frained from any active opposition to the measure are, as The 
Natal Witness puts it, distrustful of it. 
Your Memorialists hope that they have shown to your satis-
faction that the danger referred to above is imaginary and that 
the present Bill is unsatisfactory from the point of view of those 
who wish to see the Indians disenfranchised as also from that of 
the Indians themselves. 
In any case, however, your Memorialists 
claim that sufficient facts and arguments have been brought out 
to show that the question should not be hastily disposed of, and 
that there is no necessity for so doing. 
The Natal Witness thinks 
that "no explanation, at least no satisfactory one, has been given 
for the anxiety to rush the Bill through." 
The Natal Advertiser 
opines that "this Indian franchise question is a most vital one and 
there should be no haste in settling it for ever. 
Indeed the best 
course would be to postpone the proposed Bill and have the whole 
matter for the consideration of the constituencies when they have 
accurate information before them" (28-3-1896). 
The feelings of the Indian community may be well expressed 
in the words of the London Times. 
The Times (Weekly edition, 
20th March, 1896) says: 
If the Indians are allowed to carry with them their status as British 
subjects to foreign countries and British Colonies whither they go in 
quest of work, the opening up of Africa holds out new possibilities to 
Indian labour. The Indian Government and the Indians themselves 
believe that it is in South Africa that this question of their status must 
be determined. If they secure the position of British subjects in South 
Africa, it will be almost impossible to deny it to them elsewhere. 
If 
they fail to secure that position in South Africa it will be extremely diffi-
cult for them to attain it elsewhere. 
They readily acknowledge that 
Indian labourers who accept a contract of service for a period of years, 
as the price of aided immigration, must fulfil the conditions of their contract, 
however it may curtail their rights. 
But they hold that after the period 
of contracted labour has expired, they are entitled to the status of British 
subjects in whatever Colony or country they have fixed their abodes .... 
The Indian Government may reasonably ask that after Indian labourers 
have given their best years to South Africa they should not be forced 
back upon India by denying to them the status of British subjects in their 
adopted homes. 
Whatever the decision may be, it will seriously affect 
the future development of emigration in India. 
MEMORIAL TO J. CHAMBERLAIN 
337 
Dealing particularly with this question of franchise and the 
figures compiled from the Natal Government Gazette and now 
accepted as correct, the same paper says, under date 31st January, 
1896 (Weekly edition): 
According to this return, there are in the Colony 9,309 European 
registered voters against 251 
registered voters of British Indian origin . 
. . . Nor, if Mr. Gandhi's statements are correct, does it seem possible 
that the Indian vote can swamp the European at any period within 
the range of practical politics .... Not only are all Indian immigrants 
under labour contracts excluded but also all British Indians whatsoever, 
except an extremely small class, who, by intelligence and industry, have 
raised themselves to the position of well-to-do citizens .... 
The returns show that even under the existing law it takes a long 
time for a British Indian to attain the franchise in Natal. 
With the excep-
tion of 63 British Indians, many of whom started with capital, and whose 
residence in the Colony is under ten years, the rest of the 251 voters 
seem to have resided during more than 10 years and the majority over 
14. 
An analysis of the British Indian Voters' List according to occupation 
yields equally encouraging results to those who wish to see this ques-
tion settled. . . . 
It is precisely this class of men who form the most valued element 
in the municipal and other electorates in India. 
The argument that the 
Indian in Natal cannot claim higher privileges than he enjoys in India 
and that he has no franchise whatever in India is inconsistent with the 
facts .... So far as government by voting 
exists in India, Englishmen 
and Indians stand on the same footing, and alike in the Municipal, 
the Provincial, and the Supreme Councils the native interests are power-
fully represented. 
Nor does the plea that the British Indian is unacquain-
ted with the nature and responsibilities of representative government 
bear inspection. 
There is probably no other country in the world in 
which representative institutions have penetrated so deeply into the life 
of the people. . . . 
The question now before Mr. Chamberlain is not an academic one. 
It 
is not a question of argument but of race-feeling. 
The Queen's Proclamation of 
1858 gave the full rights of British subjects to the Indians and they vote in 
England and sit in the British Parliament on the same terms as Englishmen. But 
these questions are inevitable in a vast Empire made up of many peoples 
and as the steamship brings the component populations of Greater 
Britain into closer contact they will present themselves in more acute 
forms. 
Two things are clear. 
Such questions will not settle themselves 
by being ignored, and a strong Government at home affords the best 
Court of Appeal to adjudicate upon them. 
We cannot afford a war of 
races among our own subjects. It would be as wrong for the Government of 
I-22 
338 
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI 
India to suddenly arrest the development of Natal by shutting off the 
supply of immigrants as it would be for Natal to deny the rights of citi-
zenship to British Indian subjects, who, by years of thrift and good work 
in the Colony, have raised themselves to the actual status of citizens 
(the italics throughout are your Memorialists'). 
Your Memorialists now leave their case in your hands, and 
in so doing earnestly pray, and confidently hope, that the Royal 
assent to the Bill hereinbefore referred to will be withheld, and, 
if there be any fear as to the European vote being swamped by 
the Indian, an enquiry be ordered to ascertain whether there ac-
tually exists any such danger under the existing law, or such 
other relief will be granted as may meet the ends of justice. 
And for this act of justice and mercy, your Memorialists, 
as in duty bound, shall for ever pray, etc., etc. 1 
ABDUL KAREEM HAJI ADAM 
AND OTHERS 
From a photostat of a printed copy: S.N. 979-83 
