95. SPEECH AT INDIANS' MEETING2 
June 4, 1896 
After the presentation of an address, Mr. Gandhi, in acknowledging 
the kindness, said the occasion showed that whatever castes the Indians 
in Natal represented they were all in favour of being cemented in 
closer union. 
With regard to the objects of the Congress, he did not 
think any differences existed, else they would not have met as they had 
done to make its secretary a presentation. If this surmise were correct, 
he would repeat the request he made the other evening3 urging the at-
tendance of the Madras Indians at the Congress. 
Up to the present 
that attendance had not been satisfactory, but he hoped that henceforth, 
1 On September 25, 1896, C. Bird communicated to the Memorialists 
Chamberlain's decision, that "Her Majesty's Government has carefully consi-
dered their representations, but has not felt justified in advising Her Majesty 
to disallow the Act" (S.N. 160). 
2 A day before Gandhiji sailed for India, the Tamil and Gujarati Indians 
of Durban along with other communities met at the Natal Indian Congress Hall 
for the purpose of recognizing his services and presented to him an address. The 
attendance was large and much enthusiasm prevailed. 
Dada Abdulla presided. 
3 This refers to an earlier meeting of June 2, where he was presented 
an address on behalf of the Natal Indian Congress. 
A report of this meeting 
or of his speech, however, is not available. 
INTERVIEW TO "THE NATAL ADVERTISER" 
339 
they would rally in greater numbers. 
He regretted his inability to 
speak Tamil, but was sure that what he said with reference to Madras 
Indians keeping aloof would not be construed into any reflection upon 
them or any other portion of the Indian community. 
The objects of the 
Congress they all knew. 
Those objects were not to be attained by mere 
talk, and he, therefore, asked them to show their interest in its com-
mon ends by deeds, not words. 
He would particularly impress upon the 
audience to send delegates to Maritzburg, Ladysmith and other centres, 
where Indians of every class resided, and who were not yet represented 
at the Congress, and endeavour to get them to become members. 
The Natal Advertiser, 5-6-1896 
