96. 
INTERVIEW TO "THE NATAL ADVERTISER"1 
[June 4, 1896] 
In reply to various questions Mr. Gandhi said the present membership 
of the Congress was 300. The annual subscription was £3, payable in advance. 
The Congress aimed at enrolling members who were not only able to pay their 
subscriptions, but who would also work for the objects of the Congress. They 
wanted to collect a large fund which would be invested in property so that a 
permanent income might be available to carry on the objects of the Congress. 
"What are these objects?" asked the interviewer. 
They are of a twofold character — political and educational. 
As to the educational part, we want to teach the Indians born in 
the Colony by inducing them with the offer of scholarships to 
study all subjects pertaining to their welfare as a community, 
including Indian and Colonial history, temperance, etc. 
Is there any other qualification for membership in the Congress? 
Yes, one is that members should be able to read, write and 
speak English, but this condition has not been strictly enforced 
of late. 
Financially how does the Congress stand? 
There is a balance in hand of £194, and it possesses, besides, 
a property in Umgeni Road. I want the members to raise this 
balance to £1,100, during my absence, and see no reason why it 
1 On the eve of Gandhiji's departure for India a reporter of The Natal 
Advertiser called 
upon him to ascertain his 
views 
on the state of Indian 
affairs then prevailing in the Colony generally. 
340 
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI 
should not be done. 
This would do much to make it a per-
manent institution. 
What is the attitude of the Congress politically? 
It does not want to exercise any strong political influence, 
the present object being to ensure that the promises made in the 
Proclamation of 1858 are fulfilled. 
When the Indians enjoy the 
same status in the Colony as they do in India, the Congress will 
have attained its end politically. 
It has no intention to become a 
political force to swamp any other party. 
What is the number of Indian voters in the Colony? 
There are only 251 on the Voters' Roll, as against 9,309 
Europeans. 
Of the former 143 are in Durban, and the Congress 
could not put forward more than 200 more in its best efforts. 
The end of its ambition, as I said, is an equal status with the 
Europeans, and we don't object to any qualification that may 
be required. 
We are even willing that the property qualifications 
should be increased so long as it applies equally. 
What will your future programme be? 
What it has always been. 
The Congress will continue to 
ventilate the grievances of the Indian community by the publica-
tion of literature throughout the Colony, in India and England, 
and to write to the newspapers on any Indian questions as they 
come prominently before the public, and to collect funds for its 
propaganda. 
Hitherto the Congress has not invited the Press 
to any of its meetings, but it has now been decided to do this 
occasionally, and furnish it with information concerning its efforts. 
The Congress first wished to be assured of a permanent existence 
before it invited the Press to its meetings. 
There is one matter 
I would like to correct. 
The address presented to me stated that 
the various objects of the Congress had been fulfilled. 
That was 
not so. 
They were under consideration, and the Congress would 
continue to work for their attainment by every legitimate means, 
and it will resist any attempt to introduce colour distinctions in 
the legislation for the Indian community; for these, if introduced, 
might be used in other Colonies, and other parts of the world. 
The Natal Advertiser, 5-6-1896 
SOURCES 
An Autobiography or the Story of My Experiments with Truth : M. K. 
Gandhi; Ahmedabad, Navajivan Publishing House, 1956. 
The autobiography of Gandhiji translated from 
original 
Gujarati by Mahadev Desai and first published in two 
volumes: Vol. I in 1927 and Vol. II in 1929. 
Originally 
serialized in Navajivan (Gujarati) and Young India. 
COLONIAL OFFICE RECORDS: Housed in the Library of the Colonial 
Office, London, these Records include Despatches from the 
Colonial Secretary, the Governor of Natal and the British 
High Commissioner at Cape Town, to the Secretary of State 
for the Colonies; Votes and Proceedings of the Natal Legis-
latures, petitions to them, Schedules of correspondence pub-
lished by their orders; and documents and Blue-books relat-
ing to South African affairs, 
issued in South Africa and 
London. 
Dadabhai Naoroji: The Grand Old Man of India : R. P. Masani; 
London, Allen & Unwin, 1939. 
GANDHI SMARAK SANGRAHALAYA, NEW DELHI: Central Museum 
and Library of Gandhian literature and collection of photostats, 
microfilms and originals of letters and other documents; 
maintained by the Gandhi Smarak Nidhi. 
Kathiawar Times: English-Gujarati weekly newspaper published 
from Rajkot. 
Mahatma: Life of Mohandas Karamchand Gandhi: D. G. Tendulkar; 
Bombay, Jhaveri and Tendulkar, 1951-54, in eight volumes. 
(The) Natal Advertiser: Daily newspaper issued from Durban. 
(The) Natal Mercury (1852—): Daily newspaper of Durban. 
(The) Natal Witness (1846—): Independent daily newspaper of 
Pietermaritzburg. 
SABARMATI SANGRAHALAYA, AHMEDABAD : Maintained and managed 
by the Sabarmati Ashram Preservation and Memorial Trust, 
it possesses books by and on Gandhiji, files of clippings from 
over a dozen prominent South African newspapers for the 
period 1893-1901, Blue-books, and Gandhiji's records from 
1893 to 1933, including some papers pertaining to the Natal 
Indian Congress. 
342 
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI 
Shrimad Rajchandra: Mansukhlal R. Mehta (editor and publisher), 
1914; the Collected Works of Rajchandra, in Gujarati. 
The Times of Natal (1851-1927): Daily newspaper of Pietermaritz-
burg. 
The Vegetarian (1888—): Commenced publication as an indepen-
dent journal and became the London Vegetarian Society's 
weekly official organ. 
The Vegetarian Messenger: Organ of the Vegetarian Society of 
Manchester. 
